{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Arial;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
\fs22\f0
{\footer \pard\qr\fs18 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd | As-Built Submission - NPA Lighter Terminal (Lease Reg 007/2025) | 26 September 2025 | Page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}} of {\field{\*\fldinst NUMPAGES}}\par}
\pard\sa160\b O\&M / Maintenance Plan - Fence and Sliding Gates\b0\par
\b Project:\b0 Perimeter Security Fence and Gates - NPA Lighter Terminal, Ikorodu\par
\b Client:\b0 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd\par
\b Date:\b0 26/09/2025\par
\par
\b Safety\b0\par
- Isolate live traffic and moving gates before maintenance.\par
- Wear gloves and eye protection when handling barbed wire/coatings.\par
\par
\b Routine inspections\b0\par
- Monthly: Visual check of mesh tension, fixings, posts plumb, barbed wire, corrosion spots.\par
- Quarterly: Lubricate sliding gate rollers, hinges, guides (lithium EP2 grease). Check end stops and receivers.\par
- Six-monthly: Torque-check bolts/fixings (targets per manufacturer; typical M12 70 Nm, M16 170 Nm - confirm).\par
- Annually: Wash down salt deposits; touch up coating defects; verify earthing continuity and test resistance where possible.\par
\par
\b Lubrication\b0\par
- Components: rollers, hinges, guide wheels, locks.\par
- Lubricant: Lithium EP2 (or OEM recommended). Do not over-apply on brake/locking surfaces.\par
\par
\b Corrosion control\b0\par
- Clean affected area; abrade to sound coating; apply zinc-rich primer (>= 90\% Zn by mass in dry film) and compatible topcoat, total DFT per system.\par
\par
\b Adjustments\b0\par
- Re-tension mesh ties where slack; replace damaged ties.\par
- Align gates to receivers; adjust guide rollers; confirm end stops engage.\par
\par
\b Records\b0\par
- Keep maintenance logs with date, parts replaced, torque values, and photos.\par
}