{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Arial;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
\fs22\f0
{\footer \pard\qr\fs18 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd | As-Built Submission - NPA Lighter Terminal (Lease Reg 007/2025) | 26 September 2025 | Page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}} of {\field{\*\fldinst NUMPAGES}}\par}
\pard\sa160\b Compliance Statement - As-Built Structural Design / Perimeter Security Fence and Gates\b0\par
\par
\b Project:\b0 Perimeter Security Fence and Gates - NPA Lighter Terminal, Ikorodu (Lease Reg 007/2025)\par
\b Client:\b0 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd\par
\b Prepared by:\b0 RYT-Coxt Logics Limited\par
\b Date:\b0 26 September 2025\par
\par
We hereby declare that the as-built structural design, member selections, and foundation details for the perimeter fence and gates have been prepared and/or verified for compliance with the following standards and project requirements:\par
- Nigerian Building Code (applicable structural provisions)\par
- BS EN 1991-1-4: Actions on structures - Wind actions\par
- BS EN 1993 (steel design - member checks for SHS posts/rails)\par
- BS EN 1992 and BS EN 206 / BS 8500 (concrete design, materials, durability)\par
- BS 1722 (chain-link / welded mesh fencing)\par
- ISO 1461 (hot-dip galvanizing)\par
- ISO 12944 (protective paint systems) - Category C5-M\par
\par
Design basis includes: design life 25 years, basic wind speed V = 30 m/s, fence height h = 2.44 m, porosity factor psi approx. 0.5, shape factor Cf approx. 1.2, net pressure p approx. 331 N/m2, and allowable bearing capacity qa approx. 100 kN/m2 (medium-dense fill/sand). Where localized weaker fill is encountered (qa < 75 kN/m2), footing dimensions are increased to 400x400x1000 mm. Barbed-wire brackets and topping loads are included in adopted allowances.\par
\par
Materials and durability provisions comprise S355 steel posts (line posts SHS 60x60x3.0 mm) with upgraded sections for ends/corners/strainers, hot-dip galvanizing per ISO 1461, duplex coating to achieve total DFT >= 160-200 um for C5-M exposure, and concrete C25/30 with exposure classes XS3/XD3 and cover 50-60 mm.\par
\par
On the basis of the above and the as-built verification completed, the fence and gates installation satisfies the required strength, stability, and durability criteria for the terminal when installed per the drawings and schedules referenced in the submission.\par
\par
\pard\sa200\b Sign-off\b0\par
For GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd\par
Name: _________________________\tab Position: _________________________\par
Signature: ______________________\tab Date: 26 September 2025\par
\par
For RYT-Coxt Logics Limited (Consulting Engineer)\par
Responsible Engineer: Mr Temidayo\par
Signature/Stamp: ______________________\tab Date: 26 September 2025\par
}
