{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Arial;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
\fs22\f0
{\footer \pard\qr\fs18 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd | As-Built Submission - NPA Lighter Terminal (Lease Reg 007/2025) | 26 September 2025 | Page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}} of {\field{\*\fldinst NUMPAGES}}\par}
\pard\sa120\fs22 Date: 26 September 2025\par
\par
To: The Executive Director, Engineering and Technical Services\par
Nigerian Ports Authority (NPA)\par
26/28 Marina Road, Marina\par
Lagos\par
\par
Attention: General Manager, Lands \& Asset Department; Physical Planning\par
\par
\b Subject:\b0  As-Built Structural Design/Compliance Submission - Perimeter Security Fence and Gates (Lease Reg 007/2025), NPA Lighter Terminal, Ikorodu\par
\par
Dear Sir,\par
\par
GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd respectfully submits, for your review and approval, the as-built structural design and compliance package for the perimeter security fence and gates installed at the NPA Lighter Terminal, Ikorodu (Lease Reg 007/2025). The engineering report and drawings were prepared by our consulting engineer, RYT-Coxt Logics Limited.\par
\par
\b Compliance declaration\b0\par
- Verified against the Nigerian Building Code; BS EN 1991-1-4 (wind); BS EN 1993 (steel); BS EN 1992 and BS EN 206/BS 8500 (concrete); BS 1722 (chain-link/weldmesh); ISO 1461 and ISO 12944 for C5-M marine exposure.\par
- With SHS 60x60x3.0 mm S355 line posts at 3.05 m typical spacing (<= 2.75 m in exposed runs), 2.44 m-high galvanized mesh, and foundations sized for site wind actions, the installation meets required strength, stability, and durability criteria for the terminal.\par
- Duplex coatings and concrete durability classes XS3/XD3 are provided. No variances materially affecting capacity were observed during as-built verification.\par
\par
\b As-built particulars\b0\par
- Fence length/height: approx. 784.85 m; height 2.44 m with three-strand barbed-wire topping on 45-degree brackets (approx. 300 mm projection).\par
- Mesh: 50 mm aperture galvanized; wire approx. 3.55 mm (9 ga).\par
- Posts: 288 total; line posts SHS 60x60x3.0 mm S355; ends/corners/strainers SHS 80x80x4.0 mm with bracing; gate posts per drawings.\par
- Foundations: line posts 350x350x900 mm C25/30; ends/corners/strainers 450x450x1000 mm; gate plinths and receiver/guide bases per D-05.\par
- Gates: G1a and G1b sliding 5.72 m; G2 sliding 12.19 m; G3-G6 sliding 6.10 m each; pedestrian P1 (turnstile), P2 (inter-terminal), P3 (emergency).\par
- Earthing/bonding: 16 mm2 green/yellow bonds across sliding leaves; 2.4 m earth rods at approx. 100 m intervals and at gates; test points provided.\par
\page
\b Design basis summary\b0\par
- Wind: V = 30 m/s (coastal Lagos) -> q approx. 551 N/m2; porosity factor psi approx. 0.5; shape factor Cf approx. 1.2 -> p approx. 331 N/m2.\par
- Post actions and resistance: at s = 3.05 m, MEd approx. 4.50 kNm; at s = 2.75 m (exposed runs), MEd approx. 4.06 kNm; post resistance MRd (SHS 60x60x3.0 S355) approx. 4.4-4.5 kNm. Exposed runs are limited to <= 2.75 m to provide reserve capacity.\par
- Geotechnical: allowable bearing capacity qa approx. 100 kN/m2; passive pressure coefficient Kp approx. 3.0. Localized weaker fills are mitigated by increasing footings to 400x400x1000 mm where encountered.\par
\par
\b Documents enclosed\b0\par
1) Structural Design/Compliance Report RYT/GKA-IKD/PN-001 (As-Built), dated 26 September 2025\par
2) Drawing set D-01 to D-11, Rev 0, dated 26 September 2025 (As-Built - Issued for Approval)\par
3) QA records: concrete delivery tickets and 7/28-day cube results; duplex coating DFT readings; galvanizing thickness readings; mill test reports for S355 posts/rails; coating system TDS; fixing torque/pull test logs\par
4) As-built survey: fence alignment, chainages, gate coordinates\par
5) O\&M/Maintenance plan\par
\par
\b Request\b0\par
We respectfully request NPA's review and approval. We remain available for a site inspection and will promptly address any clarifications.\par
\par
Yours faithfully,\par
\par
Omobola Abiru\par
Managing Director\par
GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd\par
\par
Signature: _____________________\tab Date: 26 September 2025\par
\par
Cc: RYT-Coxt Logics Limited (Consulting Engineer)\par
}
