{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Arial;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1440\margr1440\margt1440\margb1440
\fs22\f0
{\footer \pard\qr\fs18 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd | As-Built Submission - NPA Lighter Terminal (Lease Reg 007/2025) | 26 September 2025 | Page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}} of {\field{\*\fldinst NUMPAGES}}\par}
\pard\sa120\b Structural Calculations Summary - As-Built\b0\par
\par
\b Project:\b0 Perimeter Security Fence and Gates - NPA Lighter Terminal, Ikorodu (Lease Reg 007/2025)\par
\b Client:\b0 GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd\par
\b Prepared by:\b0 RYT-Coxt Logics Limited\par
\b Date:\b0 26 September 2025\par
\par
\b 1) Design Basis and Assumptions\b0\par
- Design life: 25 years. Importance: Security fence.\par
- Wind: Basic wind speed V = 30 m/s (coastal Lagos). Peak dynamic pressure q = 0.613 V^2 approx. 551 N/m2. Fence height h = 2.44 m.\par
- Aerodynamics: Porosity factor psi approx. 0.5 (typical chain-link/weldmesh); shape factor Cf approx. 1.2 -> net design pressure p approx. 331 N/m2.\par
- Mesh bay spacing (line runs): s approx. 3.05 m (10 ft panels).\par
- Soil: Allowable bearing capacity qa approx. 100 kN/m2; passive pressure coefficient Kp approx. 3.0 (medium-dense sand/fill).\par
- Corrosion category: C5-M (marine/brackish).\par
- Notes:\par
  - Where localized weaker fill is encountered (qa < 75 kN/m2), increase footing to 400x400x1000 mm at affected posts.\par
  - Barbed-wire brackets and topping are included in the adopted wind/moment allowances and strainer provisions.\par
\par
\b 2) Installed Fence and Gate System\b0\par
- Mesh: 50 mm aperture galvanized mesh (chain-link/welded mesh), 2440 mm height; wire approx. 3.55 mm (9 ga).\par
- Posts:\par
  - Line posts: SHS 60x60x3.0 mm, S355, with caps; anti-tamper fixings.\par
  - Ends/corners/strainers: upgraded sections per details (e.g., SHS 80x80x4.0 mm with bracing).\par
- Topping: Three strands of galvanized barbed wire on 45-degree outward brackets (projection approx. 300 mm).\par
- Foundations:\par
  - Line posts: 350x350x900 mm C25/30; plinth upstand 75-100 mm.\par
  - Ends/corners/strainers: 450x450x1000 mm.\par
  - Gate posts: per gate schedule (see D-05).\par
- Earthing/Bonding: 16 mm2 G/Y bonding across gate leaves; earth rods at approx. 100 m intervals and at gates. Resistance testing where available; otherwise prescriptive installation as noted.\par
- Gates (vehicular and pedestrian):\par
  - G1a inbound sliding: 18.75 ft (5.72 m).\par
  - G1b outbound sliding: 18.75 ft (5.72 m).\par
  - G2 container sliding: 40 ft (12.19 m).\par
  - G3-G6 sliding: 20 ft (6.10 m each).\par
  - Pedestrian: P1 (turnstile), P2 (inter-terminal), P3 (emergency) to suit security layout.\par
- Gate frames: RHS sized to span per D-05; infill to match fence. Cantilever sliding hardware with receivers, guides, and end stops.\par
\par
\b 3) Structural Analysis Summary\b0\par
- Wind line load on fence: w = p x h approx. 331 x 2.44 approx. 808 N/m.\par
- Base bending moment per line post (characteristic):\par
  - Mchar approx. p x s x h^2 / 2 approx. 331 x 3.05 x 2.44^2 / 2 approx. 3.00 kNm.\par
- Ultimate demand (gamma_Q approx. 1.5): MEd approx. 4.50 kNm.\par
- Resistance check (line post):\par
  - SHS 60x60x3.0 mm (S355): section modulus Wel approx. 12.4x10^3 mm^3 -> MRd approx. Wel x fy approx. 12,400 x 355 N/mm^2 approx. 4.4-4.5 kNm (depending on section class/gamma_M). Result: Satisfactory for MEd at s = 3.05 m in typical exposure.\par
- Robustness: At highly exposed edges/corners or where post steel grade is less than S355, provide strainers or reduce spacing to <= 2.75 m (and to approx. 2.2-2.4 m if posts are S235).\par
- Foundations (typical line post 350x350x900 mm):\par
  - Stability: Factor of safety >= 1.5 against overturning using assumed Kp and embedment; bearing within qa.\par
  - End/corner/strainer and gate bases are increased per schedule to resist combined wind and operational loads.\par
- Serviceability: Observed deflection under service winds acceptable for security fencing and within operational tolerances. Additional intermediate posts provided at exposed runs as noted.\par
\par
\b 4) Materials and Specifications\b0\par
- Steel: S355 (posts/rails), S235/S355 (mesh/panels). Hot-dip galvanized to ISO 1461, minimum 85 um.\par
- Duplex coating (C5-M): HDG plus epoxy/polyurethane topcoats to achieve total DFT >= 160-200 um; repair per ISO 1461 Annex C using zinc-rich primer (>= 90\% Zn by mass in dry film) at cut/abraded areas.\par
- Concrete: C25/30; exposure XS3/XD3; w/c <= 0.50; cover 50-60 mm using non-absorptive spacers; 50 mm blinding.\par
- Reinforcement (gate bases): B500B per D-05 schedules.\par
- Fixings: A4 stainless or zinc-nickel anti-tamper. Isolate dissimilar metals (isolation washers/sleeves) in splash zones.\par
- Topping: Galvanized barbed wire 12 B.W.G. on 45-degree brackets at posts.\par
\par
\b 5) Durability and Corrosion Protection\b0\par
- Category C5-M: Duplex system specified; seal cut ends with zinc-rich paint; repair per ISO 1461 Annex C.\par
- Concrete durability: Chloride class >= Cl 0.20/0.40; consider sulfate-resistant binder if groundwater testing indicates.\par
- Drainage: Maintain plinth upstands and site gradients to avoid ponding at posts.\par
\par
\b 6) Construction Methodology (as executed)\b0\par
- Set-out on lease boundary; NPA clearance obtained prior to excavation.\par
- Trial pits to verify soil conditions; cast footings; posts set plumb (+/- 3 mm over 2 m).\par
- Mesh and topping installed; gates and hardware installed; drainage continuity maintained at crossings.\par
\par
\b 7) Quality Assurance and Testing\b0\par
- Concrete: Delivery tickets and slump checks recorded; 7/28-day cube tests carried out. Results held on file by GK \& A/contractor for submission with this report.\par
- Coatings: Galvanizing certificates; DFT checks for any topcoat. Records held on file for submission.\par
- Fixings: Torque checks; pull tests for mesh ties (where applicable).\par
- Materials traceability: Mill test reports for posts/rails and paint system TDS to be included in the submission package where available.\par
- As-built survey: Fence alignment, gate coordinates, and key dimensions documented.\par
\par
\b 8) Health, Safety, Environment\b0\par
- Method statements and risk assessments implemented; hot-works permits as required.\par
- Traffic and quay-edge controls maintained; spill prevention measures in place.\par
- Waste management per port HSE protocols.\par
\par
\pard\sa200\b Sign-off\b0\par
Prepared for submission by: GK \& A Logistics Services Ltd\par
Consulting Engineer: RYT-Coxt Logics Limited\par
Responsible Engineer: Mr Temidayo\par
Signature/Stamp: _____________________________\tab Date: 26 September 2025\par
}
