### **CHAPTER SEVEN: ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN**

#### **7.1 Introduction**
An important objective of environmental assessment is to develop procedures and plans to ensure that the mitigation measures and monitoring requirements approved during the environmental compliance review will actually be carried out in subsequent stages of the project. As a result, strong emphasis is placed on the preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plans during project processing and on setting out conditions and targets to be met during project implementation. The terms of reference for an EIA thus require that the Company prepare an EMP as a major output of the environmental assessment. The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) section presents a series of measures that will provide for mitigation of potential environmental impacts of project construction and operation which is in accordance with the Nigerian and applicable international standards and regulation. EMP guarantees an effective basis to determine the source and extent of impacts if they occur.

With this in mind, the Company will develop a plan to manage and monitor the environmental, socioeconomic, and health and safety impacts of the proposed project. Consequently, a bilateral environmental management framework is adopted. The framework consists of an Environmental Management System (EMS) and an Environmental Monitoring Programme (EMP).

#### **7.2 Objective of the EMP**
This section provides and helps to:
1.  To put in place a systematic procedure which will ensure that all project activities are executed in compliance with prevailing regulations
2.  To integrate environmental issues into overall planning, operation, audit and review to ensure that mitigation measures for all identified impacts of the project have been established and maintained during the project cycle.

#### **7.3 Implementation of Mitigation Measures**
It is necessary to ensure implementation of suggested mitigation measures. Management plan shall therefore be put in place to ensure this, the Company shall assign a Health Safety and Environment (HSE) Manager with the responsibility to liaise with the engineering team towards review and implementation of the mitigation measure necessary. Major responsibilities of the HSE Manager are to ensure the mitigation measures and monitoring programs are carried out as agreed, and reporting is completed in compliance with the National regulatory body requirements.

#### **7.4 Environmental Management Programme/Resources**
**Environmental Management System (EMS)**
The Environmental Management System (EMS) and HSE-MS manual is developed as an integral part of the detailed engineering design stage. The plan will ensure protection of the environment, employees and the public from impacts related to site preparation and operational activities of the project. The major components of the EMS that will be developed for this project include:
*   Commitment by leadership at all levels to promote operational excellence by assuring alignment of vision, expectations, resources, and accountabilities; Comprehensive identification of high-level issues, risks, opportunities, and gaps in system and operating practices that can impact current or future ability to achieve the required level of performance;
*   Establish processes to ensure documents and records that are critical to operational excellence are current, controlled, and accessible.
*   Establish clear yardsticks to measure statistically significant performance improvement toward goals and targets; implement a process to ensure that contractors ("agent") authorized to act on behalf of the company understand and comply with relevant company policies and procedure.
*   Establish and maintain appropriate processes for management to regularly monitor company's HSE performance, conduct regular HSE audits and evaluations to ensure that the system is implemented and maintained and remains effective.

**Environmental Reporting**
A reporting mechanism, with proposed timing and procedures, will be included in the EMP to provide for modifications to the Project. The Environmental reporting acts as an internal control process to ensure that environmental protection and management procedures are vigorously enforced.

**Environmental Review/Audit**
Environmental review process provides for regular assessment and evaluation of the environmental performance during the operation and maintenance phase of the project. Each environmental review/audit shall:
*   Evaluate the management systems, plant operations, monitoring practices, plans and procedure;
*   Identify current and potential environmental problems;
*   Recommend improvement to the management of operations
*   Evaluate company policy; and
*   Evaluate compliance with regulatory requirements.

**Responsibilities and Training**
GK &A Logistics Limited shall bears full responsibility of ensuring that the environmental obligations are met throughout the life cycle of this Project. The company shall establish a schedule for responsibility and training on matters relating to the Environment. Environmental issues shall be a line responsibility for which all levels of personnel are accountable.

Responsibility for Environmental management shall lie with top management that must ensure that all environmental considerations are integrated into project execution. To ensure competence and awareness among the staff to be involved in the project, the management of Company shall establish, maintain and operate a training and awareness programme. The awareness programme will include the:
i. Provision of Unsafe Act Auditing-booklet;
ii. Weekly Safety meeting;
iii. Tool box talks;
iv. Environmental lectures.

Training programme that embraced the relevance of Health, Safety and Environment in the sector shall be done and reviewed periodically by management. Certificates of attendance shall be issued to successful participants. The company shall conduct awareness campaigns for the host communities with the aim of sensitizing them to the potential impacts and hazards associated with its operations and the appropriate response to the accidents/incidents. The public awareness campaigns shall be conducted periodically and the proceedings documented for auditing.

#### **7.5 Environmental Monitoring Programs and Parameters**
The Environmental Monitoring programs and parameters is the section of the EMP which helps to outline the specific monitoring protocols, parameters, and expected frequencies. Environmental monitoring is the systematic collection of environmental data through a series of repetitive measurements.

The three known types of environmental monitoring within the conceptual EIA framework as described by UNEP (1996) are as follows:
*   **Baseline monitoring:** This refers to the measurements of environmental parameters in the pre-project period;
*   **Effects monitoring:** This involves the measurements of environmental parameters during project construction and implementation so as to identify changes in these parameters which can be attributed to the project; and
*   **Compliance monitoring:** It is the intermittent or incessant measurements of environmental parameters or discharges to ensure that regulatory requirements and standards are met.

Compliance monitoring can further be broken down into:
*   Mitigation measures monitoring, which relates to the prescribed mitigation measures, and
*   Regulatory compliance monitoring, which has to do with existing regulatory monitoring requirements.

**Post-EIA Environmental Monitoring**
The post-EIA monitoring plan for this project will comprise both effects and compliance monitoring plans. The Post EIA Environmental Monitoring Plan described in this EIA study has the wide goals of demonstrating whether an environmental change has taken place that is adducible to the construction and to alert the Company of unanticipated adverse impacts or changes in impact trends.

**Scope of Environmental Monitoring Plan**
The Environmental Monitoring plan covers two types of monitoring activities: monitoring of compliance with mitigation measures during construction activities and effects environmental monitoring, which includes sampling and analyses of discharges and the recipient environment. The monitoring programme establishes the specifics of the environmental and socioeconomic monitoring parameters for each component of the environment that will be affected by the proposed project.

The components are:
**a. Site Preparation phase**
*   Air quality
*   Noise
*   Dust
*   Vibration
*   Surface water quality
*   Hydrobiology and fisheries
*   Vegetation and wildlife
*   Soil and sediment
*   Waste and site clean-up
*   Traffic and transport
*   Personnel health and safety
*   Socioeconomic impact
*   Land contamination

**b. Operational Phase**
*   Noise
*   Flora and fauna
*   Air quality;
*   Greenhouse gas and adaptation to climate change
*   Dust
*   Vibration
*   Waste management
*   Water quality
*   Recording and reporting of complaints
*   Traffic Management
*   Safety
*   Emergency management;

**c. Decommissioning phase**
*   Air quality
*   Water quality
*   Sediment and erosion control
*   Waste management
*   Dust
*   Noise
*   Vibration
*   Waste and site clean
*   Emergency Management
*   Safety
*   Contingency plans for evacuation
*   Landscaping, re-vegetation, stabilization and rehabilitation
*   Removal of structures associated with the development

In support of the project activities, predicted impacts and recommended mitigation measures, the monitoring programme described below is considered adequate for the project.

Regular data collection, audits, inspections, and related monitoring activities will be required for each category at a pre-determined frequency, either based on the schedule established in the regulations for Regulatory Monitoring or based on the Post-EIA monitoring schedule established specifically for the proposed project. Reports will be submitted to the Lagos State Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources.

All monitoring components will be subject to audit, internally by the Company and externally by the State regulatory authorities. Project monitoring environment shall be monitored throughout the project cycle from site preparation to decommissioning. Each monitoring programme will follow the established schedule; monitoring may be performed daily, weekly, quarterly, semi-annually, annually, biennially, or continuously, depending upon the resource, regulatory requirements for Regulatory Monitoring.

The detailed monitoring plan will follow Nigerian regulatory requirement as well as the World Bank's Environmental Performance Monitoring and supervision Guidelines. Successful environmental supervision requires a mechanism to
(i) Determine whether the executing agency is carrying out the project in conformity with the EMP,
(ii) Identify problems, and
(iii) To develop plans for corrective action.

**Monitoring Schedule and Parameters**
Monitoring duration of all the parameters in the sand dredging project shall be for the life of the project. Much of the monitoring and data generation shall be on an on-site basis. The parameters to be measured and the frequency of measurement are indicated below:

**Air Quality and Noise**
Air quality parameters that will be measured shall include:
*   Particulates;
*   Noxious gases (NO2, CO, SO2, VOC)
*   Noise levels

Locations for monitoring shall be within project site, upwind and downwind of the premises. As much as possible, in reporting the findings from the monitoring, measurements shall be compared with regulatory limits as well as the baseline data presented in Chapter five of this project.

**Ground Water Quality**
Water samples will be collected from boreholes on the site and analyzed for significant physico-chemical and microbiological parameters.

**Socio-economics**
Socio-economic parameters are not as easily measurable as physico-chemical and biological indices. Given the various interfaces between the project and the socio-economy, as described in chapter four of this report, the main socio-economic index that can be monitored is traffic. As such, the baseline traffic situation will be established, prior to commencement of operational activities. Traffic will be monitored on a weekly basis during site preparation and on a quarterly basis when the project is operational.

**Health and Safety of Workers**
Operations at all work sites shall be subject to Government, industry and company policies and guidelines. All Company and contractor staff shall be well informed and trained on the Health and Environmental Safety policies and guidelines. All facilities shall also be designed to enhance safety planning and activities shall be executed within the confines of relevant legislation and stakeholders' interests. All construction work by contractors shall be properly managed through careful planning and the application of relevant Healthy Safety and Environmental policies including the following:
*   Use of Permit to Work (PTW)
*   Job Hazard Analysis and toolbox meetings
*   Use of PPE in designated hazard areas
*   Prohibition of alcohol during work hours and at work sites and facilities
*   Regular emergency drills;

---
**Table 7.1: Pre- Construction Phase EMP**

| Environmental Component | Source of impact | Objective | Management Plan | Responsible party | Monitoring frequency |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Ambient Air quality** | - noxious gas emissions from operation of vehicles and machinery<br>- suspended particulates from site clearing activities and vehicle/machinery movement | - Reduction of gaseous pollutants/emissions from vehicles and machinery<br>- Suppression of dust from project activities. | - All vehicles and machinery will be regularly serviced, equipped with catalytic converters and switched off when not in use<br>- Only portions of the site as required will be devegetated and water bowser will be used for regular dust suppression | GK &A Logistics Limited site supervisor | - Dust suppression will be carried out at least twice daily during the dry season<br>- Air quality monitoring (emissions & particulates) will be conducted weekly |
| **Noise Level** | - Movement and operation of vehicles and machinery<br>- clearing/preparation activities | - Minimize noise to acceptable levels<br>- protect workers from noise exceeding | - Selection of low noise level equipment equipment<br>- All activities shall be limited to daytime to avoid night time disturbance<br>- All workers will be provided with appropriate PPEs<br>- All machinery will be serviced regularly and installed with appropriate noise mufflers | GK &A Logistics Limited site supervisor | - Average ambient noise levels will be measured daily during this phase of the project |
| **Soil** | - fuel and oil leaks/spills from storage area and poor handling<br>- Poor waste (sewage, vegetal and domestic) management practices | - To protect the soil from fuel, oil and other forms of contamination<br>- To protect the soil from erosion | - Fuel and oil shall only be allowed in designated storage and handling areas which will be appropriately concretized to prevent seepage<br>- Only portions of the site required for project activities will be devegetated to reduce the possibility of water and wind erosion | GK &A Logistics Limited site supervisor | soil quality monitoring shall be conducted weekly |
| **Flora and Fauna** | - site clearing and vegetation stripping | - To prevent the unnecessary loss of ecologically important/sensitive local flora and fauna where applicable | - Noticed fauna in the proposed project site will be preserved by taking it or allowing it room to migrate to areas that will remain undisturbed<br>- where possible, important/sensitive flora will be left undisturbed or transplanted<br>- Only portions of the site required for project related activities will be devegetated | GK &A Logistics Limited site supervisor | Flora and fauna will be assessed monthly |
| **Waste (solid, sewage and hazardous) Management** | - spent oil and used batteries from vehicles and machinery<br>- vegetal waste from site clearing<br>- sewage generated by site workers<br>- refuse generated by site workers and from overburden such as disused metal, shoes etc | - To safely keep generated hazardous waste and dispose of appropriately<br>- To protect sewage from contaminating the soil and/or ground water<br>- To manage and appropriately dispose all refuse and vegetal waste generated on site | - Used oil and used batteries storage areas shall be constructed according to environmental guidelines, Lockable, concreted and bunded shed shall be constructed.<br>- Mobile toilets shall be provided for use for the site workers<br>- All waste will be collected in segregated bins prior to collection and final disposal by a LAWMA accredited operator<br>- Reusable items such as wood, metal cuttings etc will be collected and reused as required during project activities where possible, sold or given to the locals for domestic use | GK &A Logistics Limited site supervisor | Waste management activities shall be daily throughout the project’s life Span |
| **Socioeconomics** | Influx of project workers into the community could cause:<br>- increased strain on communal amenities like roads, water etc<br>- improved employment opportunities for indigenes | - To ensure harmony between project workers and the host community<br>- To minimize public health and safety risks<br>- To ensure the economic empowerment of the community via employment of community members | - Pre-employment and regular medical examinations will be carried out on all employees to ascertain their health<br>- continuous consultation with the community to ensure continued peace and support for the project shall be ensured<br>- safety and security of all project equipment and materials will be of high priority to prevent incidents and accidents<br>- Indigenes with the requisite skills will be considered for the various types of available jobs | GK &A Logistics Limited site supervisor | Consultation shall be continuous throughout the project’s life span |

---
**Table 7.2: Operational Phase EMP**

| Environmental Component | Source of impact | Objective | Management Plan | Responsible party | Monitoring frequency |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Ambient Air quality** | - noxious gas emissions and particulates from operation of dredger and other machinery | - Reduction of gaseous pollutants/emissions | - All vehicles and machinery will be regularly serviced, equipped with catalytic converters and switched off when not in use | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Air quality monitoring (emissions & particulates) will be conducted weekly |
| **Noise Level** | - Movement of vehicles<br>- increased human population in project area<br>- Use of power generating set | - Minimize noise to acceptable levels<br>- Protect workers, residents and guests from noise exceeding acceptable levels | - All machinery will be serviced regularly and installed with appropriate noise mufflers<br>- Power generating set will be soundproofed | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | - Average ambient noise levels will be measured weekly during this phase of the project |
| **Water Quality** | - Contamination caused by fuel and oil leaks/spills from handling and surface runoff<br>- Poor waste (sewage, vegetal and domestic) management practices | - To minimize and prevent (where possible) the contamination of the water<br>- To prevent water contamination from oil, diesel, sewage, refuse and chemicals through runoffs, spills, seepage and indiscriminate disposal and handling | - Bund walls and drains employed to collect spilled oil or storm water runoffs<br>- Fuel storage tanks will be placed within bunds with concreted surface and sump shall be constructed in such a way as to collect any oil that has spilled<br>- Provision of proper sewage and drainage systems<br>- Daily toolbox talks and trainings will include spill prevention and chemical material handling<br>- proper waste management practices like designated/segregated waste bins shall be enforced to discourage littering and dumping in the water body | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Water quality monitoring shall be conducted bimonthly |
| **Soil** | - fuel and oil leaks/spills from storage area and poor handling<br>- Poor waste (sewage, vegetal and domestic) management practices | - To protect the soil from contamination by fuel, oil and hazardous substances.<br>- To protect the soil from erosion | - Fuel and oil shall only be allowed in designated storage and handling areas which will be appropriately concretized to prevent seepage | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | soil quality monitoring shall be conducted monthly |
| **Waste (solid, sewage and hazardous) Management** | - spent oil and used batteries from vehicles and machinery, vegetal waste, sewage, refuse generation | - To safely keep generated hazardous waste and dispose of appropriately<br>- To protect sewer waste from contaminating the environment<br>- To manage and appropriately dispose all refuse and vegetal waste generated on site | - Used oil and used batteries storage areas shall be constructed according to environmental guidelines.<br>- Domestic waste will be collected and segregated in bins prior to collection and final disposal by a LAWMA accredited operator | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Waste management activities shall be continuous throughout the project’s life span |
| **Health and Safety** | - incidents and accidents during project operations | - To minimize public health and safety risks such as the spread of STDs and other communicable diseases<br>- To minimize accidents during routine and facility maintenance | - appropriate signage and fire fighting equipment strategically placed | Climax Pharmaceuticals Limited HSE Managers | - |

---
**Table 7.3: Decommissioning Phase EMP**

| Environmental Component | Source of impact | Objective | Management Plan | Responsible party | Monitoring frequency |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Ambient Air quality** | - noxious gas emissions from operation of vehicles and machinery<br>- suspended from decommissioning activities | - Reduction of gaseous pollutants/emissions from vehicles and machinery<br>- Suppression of dust from reclaimed parcel of land. | - All vehicles and machinery be regularly serviced, equipped with catalytic converters and switched off when not in use<br>- Natural revegetation of all exposed portions of the land will be allowed pending a final decision on the eventual use of the land | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Monitoring will be throughout this phase |
| **Noise Level** | - Movement and operation of vehicles and machinery<br>- Site clearing/decommissioning activities | - Minimize noise to acceptable levels<br>- protect workers from noise exceeding acceptable levels | - Selection of low noise level equipment<br>- All activities shall be limited to daytime to avoid night time disturbance<br>- All workers will be provided with appropriate PPEs<br>- All machinery will be serviced regularly and installed with appropriate noise mufflers | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Monitoring will be throughout this phase |
| **Soil** | - Demolition/removal of all temporary onsite camp structures | - To protect the soil from contamination and erosion | - Removal of all potential soil contaminants by an appropriately qualified personnel will be ensure before the decommissioning of oil, fuel and chemical storage/handling areas<br>- Natural revegetation of entire project area will be encouraged to stabilize the soil and deter erosion<br>- All trenches and drainage channels will be backfilled to ensure soil stabilization | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Monitoring will be throughout this phase |
| **Surface Water quality** | - Demolition/removal of existing infrastructure | - To prevent surface water contamination | - Removal of all project related materials such as demolition wastes by qualified personnel will be ensured to prevent contamination of water resources | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE Manager | Monitoring will be throughout this phase |
| **Waste (solid, sewage and hazardous) Management** | - spent oil and used batteries from vehicles and machinery, vegetal waste, sewage, refuse generation | - To ensure the safe disposal of all waste generated during decommissioning | - All construction waste will be sorted and disposed, recycled, sold and/or given to the locals for domestic use according to the State’s waste management regulations | GK &A Logistics Limited HSE officer | Monitoring will be throughout this phase |
| **HSE** | - loss of livelihood<br>- reduced local revenue | - To reduce the negative impact of lost jobs on workers | - All employees and workers will be informed well ahead of time before final closure of project operations<br>- All appropriate commissions will be paid to the engaged workers | GK &A Logistics Limited Management | Monitoring will be throughout this phase |

---
**Table 7.4: Monitoring plan for environmental parameters**

| Environmental Component | Parameter | Frequency | Responsible parties |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Air quality** | CO, NOx, SOx, VOC, Particulates | Weekly | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Noise** | Ambient noise level and vibration | Weekly | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Surface Water quality** | BOD, COD, TSS, pH, cations, anions, heavy metals and coliform | Bimonthly | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Soil** | Heavy metals, pH, THC, cations, anions and coliform | Monthly | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Waste** | Types and volume of wastes generated, collected and disposed | Monthly | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |

---
#### **7.6 Project's Health and Safety Plan**
Throughout the project lifecycle, consideration will be given to ensure that project activities do not result in impairment of well-being of the staff and visitor/guests to the project as well as local community. The proponent's contractor on the project's construction will adhere to international safety standard including safety signs, use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) and operational safety checklist. Site investigation will be carried out to develop safety precautions and measures prior to the commencement of the work. After such investigation, relevant sign boards will be displayed and barricades will be installed where and as necessary. The contractor shall be responsible for the following amongst others:
i. Overall control, co-ordination, supervision and administration of the whole of the Project in respect of health and safety management, including all associated contractors, nominated sub-contractors, suppliers and visitors;
ii. Arrange and monitor a programme for health safety and environmental management with each associated contractor, and subcontractor, and supply all information as necessary for the safe coordination of all work activities relative to the health and safety on the Site;
iii. Prepare a Health and Safety Programme for the Project, covering times of working, partial handovers etc. and ensure this programme takes into account the work of all associated contractors and subcontractors, whether nominated or otherwise with health and safety goals being Zero Accident and Zero Incident;
iv. Engage suitably competent and adequately resourced staff, and ensure that associated contractors do likewise to their subcontractors by ensuring that HSE targets are met and that sufficient training is reviewed, and that reports on a daily, weekly, monthly, six monthly and annual basis in respect of health and safety management are made available to the workers and the safety personnel. All workers shall be provided with suitable health and safety information, instruction and training in respect of their work activities;
v. Prepare and enforce all necessary site rules, provide relevant parts of the HSE plan and other information to subcontractors and suppliers in sufficient time for them to plan their work.

The meeting shall be scheduled prior to the beginning of the work and before any Sub-contractor starts work on the project. Safety awareness meetings will be conducted every working day morning/every other day to brief the workforce in safety prevention measures. The equipment check for safety shall be recorded/ documented during the daily Safety Awareness Meeting. Traffic safety will be discussed to emphasize these meetings. Each worker will be instructed to follow specific safety requirements related to his trade. They will be required to follow installed safety signs, observe barricades and use opens.

An on-site clinic will be set up to provide treatment to workers who may get simple injuries on-site. For injuries that cannot be handled at the site clinic, First Aid will be provided before the causality is rushed to the retainer ship hospital. The clinic will be well facilitated with all First Aid Kits that may be deemed necessary. All construction workers, contractor and visitor must report all accidents resulting in injury, damage to any property or dangerous occurrences/ near misses.

**Hazard/Risk Analysis**
The contractor Safety will perform hazard risk analysis by identifying all steps, hazards identified in those steps, with a focus on the relationship between the work task, the tools, and the work environment. After identifying uncontrolled hazards; the Contractor will take steps to eliminate or reduce them to an acceptable level. General contractual Safety, Health, and Environment requirement.

#### **7.7 Emergency Response Plan**
This Emergency Response Plan (ERP) is a guide to respond to emergency situations which may arise in the cause of the construction and operation of the project. This ERP forms part of a comprehensive Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and identifies likely emergency situations together with their causative factors followed by an elaboration of the proposed response. The plan finally identifies the respondents in order of priority. It is anticipated that implementation of this plan along with Emergency Response provisions of the HSE policies of the project proponent would help minimize the risks associated with implementation of the proposed project within acceptable levels. The plan is however subject for review each time there is a new, unforeseen emergency situation and incorporates all causative factors resulting in such emergency situations for improved future response performance.

**Purpose of the Plan**
*   Provide guidelines for responding to and managing a variety of emergency situations;
*   Reduce liability and loss of assets and business;
*   Protect the community and the public;
*   Ensure employees have the skills and abilities to act efficiently and effectively during emergency situations;
*   Mobilization of appropriate resources to manage the emergency; and
*   Coordinate effectively with the Emergency Services.

**Emergency Incidents**
The Project Proponent shall throughout the life of the project, continue to assess possible risks to the communities as it relates to emergency incidents. Specific and timely information on appropriate behaviour and safety measures shall be adopted in the event of an accident. Communities and other stakeholders shall have access to information necessary to understand the nature of the possible effect of an accident and an opportunity to contribute effectively, as appropriate, to decisions concerning hazardous installations. Specific attention shall be given to the transportation of any hazardous materials. A procedure shall be developed to ensure compliance with local laws and international requirements relating to the transportation of hazardous materials, including waste classification and hazard analysis, labelling, emergency response approach, vehicle and container specifications, training of the drivers, risks associated with the transportation route etc.

Where the consequences of emergency events are likely to extend beyond the project boundary (e.g. hazardous material spill during transportation on public roads), emergency response plans shall be developed based on the risks to the health and safety of the affected community and other potentially affected stakeholders.

Emergency plans shall address the following aspects of emergency response and preparedness:
*   Specific emergency response procedures.
*   Communication strategy.
*   Trained emergency response teams.
*   Emergency contacts and communication systems/protocols.

**Emergency Response**
Appropriate emergency preparedness and response plans shall be developed to ensure the effective management and mitigation of emergency incidents. Procedures shall be developed based on the appropriate classification of the possible incidents. The following aspects of emergency preparedness and response shall be addressed:
*   The identification of the emergency scenarios and the development of appropriate and specific emergency response procedures for each scenario.
*   The training of emergency response teams on the appropriate procedures and the use of emergency response equipment.
*   The identification of emergency contacts and support services and the development of effective communication systems / protocols (including communication with potentially affected communities).
*   As part of the development of emergency preparedness and response plans, involve the appropriate government authorities to determine procedures for engagement, communication and reporting (emergency, health, environmental authorities).
*   Emergency equipment and facilities must be provided (e.g., first aid stations, firefighting equipment, spill response equipment, personal protection equipment).
*   identification and availability of the appropriate personal protective equipment and equipment.
*   Clarification of roles and responsibilities of individuals or groups as well as the decision process for assessing severity of the release and determining appropriate actions.

---
**Table 7.5 Emergency Response Plan**

| Emergency Situation | Likely cause | Proposed Response | Respondents |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Traffic Accidents (water)** | - speeding trucks and project vehicles as a result of drunk driving, carelessness or fatigue | - Victims will be treated using first aid at onsite camp clinic site prior to reference to the Primary Health Centre or General hospital. | Site/Project Manager HSE Manager, the Police and health centre medical personnel |
| **Staff Injury** | - Unskilled labour<br>- Neglect of safety procedures<br>- Faulty equipment and tools<br>- Sheer Accidents<br>- No safety induction | - Apply appropriate First Aid,<br>- Document all incidents and accidents.<br>- Evacuate to hospital if necessary.<br>- Investigate causative factor and institute appropriate measures to prevent similar occurrence | HSE Officer, First Aid Attendant on Duty, and Hospital Staff |
| **Fire outbreak on machinery and buildings.** | - Neglect of safety procedures.<br>- Act of arson<br>- Equipment failure | - Sound alarm and instruct all to assemble at Fire Assembly point.<br>- Conduct roll Call.<br>- Fight the fire using appropriate firefighting equipment like extinguishers, sand, water on buildings and equipment.<br>- Document incident | HSE Manager, Emergency Response Team, Fire Brigade, Police Force |
| **Oil, Fuel and Chemical spills** | - Neglect of safety procedures<br>- Equipment/machinery malfunction<br>- Act of sabotage | - Contain spillages by applying suitable material to stop material flow and spread (e.g. Spill Kits).<br>- Inform LSMOE&WR and other relevant agencies,<br>- Clean up affected areas.<br>- Document incident | HSE Manager, Emergency Response Team, LSMOE&WR |

---
#### **7.8 Monitoring Schedule and Parameters**
Monitoring duration of all the parameters in the sand dredging project shall be for the life of the project. Much of the monitoring and data generation shall be on an on-site basis. The parameters to be measured and the frequency of measurement, are indicated below:

**Air Quality and Noise**
Air quality parameters that will be measured shall include:
*   Particulates;
*   Noxious gases (NO2, CO, SO2, VOC)
*   Noise levels

Locations for monitoring shall be within project site, upwind and downwind of the premises. As much as possible, in reporting the findings from the monitoring, measurements shall be compared with regulatory limits as well as the baseline data presented in Chapter five of this project.

**Water Quality**
Ground water samples will be collected from boreholes and analysed for significant parameters. The parameters that will be measured include the following:
*   pH, Conductivity, TDS, Dissolved Oxygen and Biochemical Oxygen Demand;
*   Total Suspended Solids, Turbidity;
*   Total hydrocarbons;

Monitoring shall be conducted in at least 4 points: one point within the immediate vicinity of the project site, one point upstream (control point).

**Socio-economics**
Socio-economic parameters are not as easily measurable as physico-chemical and biological indices. Given the various interfaces between the project and the soda-economy, as described in chapter four of this report, the main sodo-economic index that can be monitored is traffic. As such, the baseline traffic situation will be established, prior to commencement of operational activities. Traffic will be monitored on a weekly basis during site preparation and on a quarterly basis when the project is operational.

**Health and Safety of Workers**
Operations at all work siteshall be subject to Government, industry andcompany policies and guidelines. All Company and contractor staff shall be well informed and trained on the Health and Environmental Safety policies and guidelines.
All facilities shall also be designed to enhance safety planning and activities shall be executed within the confines of relevant legislation and stakeholders' interests. All construction work by contractors shall be properly managed through careful planning and the application of relevant Healthy Safety and Environmental policies including the following:
*   Use of Permit to Work (PTW)
*   Job Hazard Analysis and toolbox meetings
*   Use of PPE in designated hazard areas
*   Prohibition of alcohol during work hours and at work sites and facilities
*   Regular emergency drills;

#### **7.9 Pollution Control**
**Air pollution**
The Company shall utilize all practical methods and devices available to control, prevent, and otherwise minimize atmospheric emissions or the discharge of air contaminants. Good engine efficiency of equipment and vehicles shall be maintained. Indiscriminate burning of materials resulting from clearance of trees, bushes and combustible materials shall also not be permitted.

**Noise pollution**
The Company shall comply will all requirements for noise control and regulatory standards. All equipment shall be employed to minimize noise. Earmuffs shall be provided for all workers and any other person present in the vicinity of high noise generating equipment or operation. If noise level at any time gives rise to public complaint, the issue shall be treated as public nuisance and the Company will take appropriate measure to resolve the problem with the appropriate authorities. Safe separation distances and buffer zones shall be established between pipeline and host communities to reduce the impact of high noise levels from the equipment.

**Waste Management Guideline**
Waste management is an important aspect of controlling, minimizing project impacts on the Environment. All project phases will involve waste generation, which will need to be adequately managed for minimal impact on the environment. The principle of waste reduction, recycling, recovery and reusing shall be practiced. All wastes, which cannot be reused, will be managed and disposed in accordance with Company's waste management plan to reduce effects/impacts on the environment and must be upheld and implemented throughout the project cycle. The handling, storage and disposal of wastes and the waste management guidelines in Table 7.6 take into consideration the regulations of State and other national and international environmental agencies and these standards are binding on all staff and contractors involved in the proposed project with respect to the:
*   Emission of release of pollutant, exhaust and/or fugitive gases.
*   Discharge or spill of effluent into surface water, swamp or land.
*   Discharge of solid wastes (including domestic waste) into surface water, swamp or land.
*   Generation of noise and vibration.

---
**Table 7.6: Waste Management Guidelines**

| S/N | TYPE | MANAGEMENT/TREATMENT |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | Domestic Waste/Rubbish from base camps | Store in closed containers. Follow local requirement for disposal |
| 2 | Sanitary Wastes | Mobile Toilet Facility shall be provided |
| 3 | Scrap metal | Small metal items to be stored in containers. Larger metal items and disused machinery to be inventoried for disposal. Mark for refurbishing, reuse or dispose otherwise. |
| 4 | Non-plastic combustible packaging materials | Containerized in designated containers. Follow local requirements in disposal |
| 5 | Plastic packaging materials | Containerized in designated containers. Reuse or dispose appropriately |
| 6 | Hazardous substances<br>- Waste oils<br>- Hydrocarbon-based<br>- Detergents<br>- Hazardous chemicals<br>- Solvents | Storage in separate containers/drums and labeled with contents. Managed in areas designed to control any loss of containment incidents |
| 7 | Cement slurries and mix | Confine and Dispose appropriately |
| 8 | Kitchen wastes (organic) | Segregate and package for disposal. Follow applicable local requirement for disposal |
| 9 | Equipment/Engine wastes | Re-use |
| 10 | Spills and leakages | - Put in place adequate control equipment for immediate containment and clean-up<br>- Regular practice of emergency drills |
| 11 | Welds/radio-active materials waste | To be packaged and returned to manufacturer |

---
**Waste Handling Guidelines**
For proper handling and disposal, wastes shall be well defined at source and the definition transmitted along with the waste to final disposal points. Contractors and Company personnel shall define and document all wastes generated in the course of work. Basic information that must be provided, as a minimum, for adequate definition of wastes include:
*   Waste type identification
*   Proper waste categorization
*   Waste segregation information
*   Recommended management practices.

**Waste Minimization Guidelines**
Waste minimization implies reduction to the greatest extent possible of the volume or toxicity of waste materials. The four principles of waste minimization process: recycle, reduce, reuse, and recovery shall be adopted as applicable. Opportunities to achieve significant waste volume reduction during the proposed project are functions of activity level, age, depreciation and maintenance level of facilities and operating equipment. A large proportion of excavated material shall be used for landscaping or other remedial works on site. In addition, all oils, hydraulic fluids, oily sump water, etc. shall be recycled or treated before disposal at an appropriate waste disposal facility. At the pre-construction phase clearing of vegetation shall be kept to the barest minimum necessary to permit safe operations. Woody plant debris from site shall be re-utilised for the benefit of the host communities or as otherwise requested by the Company in consultation with the communities.

**Waste Segregation Guidelines**
For effective implementation of appropriate waste disposal methods, it is important that wastes be segregated, preferably at source into clearly designated bins at strategic locations. Particular attention should be given to work areas where a variety of wastes are generated such as in kitchens and the Field Logistic Base (FLB) to be established as part of this project.

**Waste Disposal Guidelines**
All debris, spoil materials, rubbish and other waste, except excavated soil and rock shall be cleared regularly from the sites and disposed off at Government designated areas and facilities. Instruction on materials safety handling sheet shall be strictly adhered to and shall be properly packaged and returned to manufacturers for proper disposal. Wastes in transit must be accompanied and tracked by consignment notes. The waste consignment notes shall contain the following as a minimum:
*   Date of dispatch
*   Description of waste
*   Waste quantity/container type;
*   Consignee/driver name and means of transportation; and
*   Confirmation of actual disposal (time and date).

**Liquid Wastes**
These will include wastewaters/hydrates water, chemical and hydrocarbon spills/leakages. contingency plans for pollution control shall be maintained and where discharges are unavoidable they shall be closely monitored and minimized.

**Hydrocarbon Spills**
Minor hydrocarbon spills shall be cleaned immediately using appropriate absorbent granules and powders. Direct flushing into the river/streams shall not be permitted until such measures have been taken and the majority of the spill absorbed.

#### **7.10 Noise Minimization Guidelines**
Noise vibration generated by vehicles and equipment shall meet the ergonomic requirements of the Company and other National and International Standards, Codes of Practice and Statutory Regulations. Where noise level exceeds the stipulated limits, it shall be treated as nuisance and the contractor concerned shall put in place adequate mitigation measures to ensure that the situation is properly addressed. All personnel working for long periods in high noise shall be required to use earmuffs at all times. Permanent warning signs shall be posted at the boundaries of these restricted areas. The following noise limits shall be used in the design:
*   Machinery workshops: 70 dB (A)
*   Temporary Shelters: 60 dB (A)
*   Site offices: 45 dB (A)

#### **7.11 Site Inspection Procedures**
The HSE supervisor and representatives of regulatory bodies throughout the project life will carry out regular inspection of sites and facilities. The main objective of such inspections shall be to assess compliance level with mitigation measures and recommendations of the EIA.

The site shall therefore be made accessible at all time for inspectors upon authentication of identity to:
*   Examine and inspect all equipment that could cause pollution;
*   Collect samples of any atmospheric emissions, effluent, discharge or solid waste deposition for analyses and interpretation;
*   Examine all construction and operation Logbooks for environmentally related issues.

After each inspection, the supervisor shall compile a site inspection report detailing the:
*   Specific facilities or areas inspected,
*   Details of project activities, and
*   Highlights of any observed non-compliance/persistent negligence

Plan EMP follows up process covering the project phases are presented in Table 7.2

---
**Table 7.7 Monitoring Schedule**

| Environmental Component | Parameter | Approach/Method | Frequency | Responsible Parties |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Noise** | Level | Sensor measurement around project location and point established for this study | Weekly (during Construction) | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Water Quality** | Turbidity | Standard method of sampling and analysis | Monthly | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Health, Safety and Environment** | Public and Workers Health | Hazard and Risk assessment | Weekly (during Construction) | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Air Quality** | SOx, COx, NOx, VOCs, Suspended Particulate matter | Sensor measurement around project area and points established for the measurements. | Weekly (during Construction) | GK &A Logistics Limited, Environmental Consultant and LSMOE&WR |
| **Socio-economics** | Employment/income | Questionnaires, Direct observations and Interviews around project area. | Annually | GK &A Logistics Limited |

---
#### **7.12 Stakeholders Engagement**
Sustained Stakeholder Consultation and engagement shall be undertaken during all phases of the project. A robust Stakeholder Forum shall be established including directly affected parties, representatives from the local municipality and other identified persons. The forum shall serve to communicate project progress, material changes to the project, grievances received and corrective action taken. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is a live document and shall be revised regularly to document all consultation activities proposed and undertaken. The appropriateness and effectiveness of methods of stakeholder engagement shall be reviewed on a regular basis and existing methods revised and alternative methods implemented as required. Specific consideration shall be given to the inclusiveness of the method utilized to ensure all stakeholders including individuals, communities and groups and organizations are included.

#### **7.13 Grievance Resolution Mechanism (GRM)**
A fair grievance resolution mechanism shall be adopted. A grievance/ complaint can be submitted in the following ways:
i. By communicating the grievance/ complaint to the local Authority/ community Development Associations (via letter/note or verbally) who will be responsible for reporting the issue to the Proponent;
ii. By submitting the grievance directly to Proponent (either verbally or in writing); and

All grievances received shall be forwarded to the Project Management Offices (PMO) who shall be responsible for recording them in a Grievance/Complaints Register and for implementing the grievance response mechanism.

When a grievance is received, the mechanism for dealing with it shall be as follows:
i. Grievance received;
ii. Grievance recorded in the Grievance/ complaints Register;
iii. For an immediate action, the complainant shall be informed of corrective action;
iv. Implement corrective action, record the date and close case;
v. For a long term corrective action, the complainant shall be informed of proposed action and Implement corrective action, record the date and close case.