### **CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION**

**1.1 Background Information**

Nigeria has over the years become import dependent for critical raw materials, finished goods and other consumables with almost eighty percent of imports coming through the seaports particularly Apapa and Tin-can Ports. With these Ports functioning with aged infrastructure and equipment, congestion became inevitable over the years resulting in freight operators spending an average of two weeks to get into the port. The port corridor now play host to long queues of trucks trying to get into the ports to truck out containers. This congestion which is almost crippling operations at the Lagos Ports, has compelled some shipping lines to divert Nigeria-bound cargoes to neighboring ports in Cotonou and Cote D'lvoire according to Nigerian Ports Consultative Council. These diversions result in obvious economic losses to Nigeria running into billions of Naira in revenue that should have accrued to the Nation.

It is pertinent to mention that addressing this challenge that is impacting negatively not only the nation's revenue but also on logistic and supply chain sector of the economy requires multi-faceted approach involving all stakeholders. Experts, practitioners and Stakeholders in Shipping and Maritime Sector have identified critical efforts required in addressing this challenge. These include Port concession to bring about efficiency, rehabilitation of Port access and inner roads, automation of port inspections, acquisition of new equipment to replace obsolete ones and establishment of terminals outside the Port area.

It is in this regard that GK&A Logistics Services is proposing to support Government's efforts at decongesting the Apapa and Tin Can Ports with the development of a Container Terminal at Ipakodo/Ebute-lga waterfront of the Lagos Lagoon, in Ikorodu Local Government Area of Lagos State. To ensure sustainable implementation of the proposed project and compliance with statutory regulatory requirements, the proposed Container Terminal is to be subjected to Environmental Impact Assessment.

Consequently, GK&A Logistics Services commissioned Greenway Consult Limited to conduct the Environmental Impact Assessment of the proposed Container Terminal in fulfillment of regulatory requirements and in line with the Company HSE Policy.

The EIA included well-planned site visits, field survey and samples collection, laboratory analyses, and secondary data acquisition from existing reports and publications, as well as derivation of spatially referenced data using GIS and remote sensing technologies. Essentially, Environmental Impact Assessment is a decision-making tool which ensures that environmental and socio-economic impacts of a proposed project or activities are satisfactorily assessed and considered through planning to implementation of the proposed project or activity. It ensures that the "best" approach/alternative for the project is selected. In EIA, broad elements of the environment of a proposed project are assessed, predictions are made of the possible change such a project could have on such elements of the environment and measures to either eliminate or minimize (mitigate) the effects of such changes are proffered.

This report therefore presents an evaluation of existing (baseline) environmental conditions of the project area based on assessment of the biophysical, socio-economic, safety and health parameters. It covers an assessment of planned project activities, the potential and associated impacts of the proposed project and the mitigation measures for the negative impacts.

**1.2 Objectives of the Study**

The overall aim of this study was to establish a baseline inventory of the existing ecological status of the proposed project area, establish the potential associated biophysical and socio-economic impacts of the proposed activities and develop an efficient, realistic and implementable Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The essence is to incorporate the findings of the study in the project plan and activities with the aim of ensuring that the various elements of the environment are not adversely impacted while the beneficial impacts are well harnessed. Specifically, the following are the objectives of this study:

*   Conduct a baseline survey of the ecosystem structure and other environmental assets in the proposed project area so as to provide reference database for the existing environmental conditions.
*   Identify and assess potential impacts likely to result from the operations of the facility
*   Identify existing environmental regulations that will affect the project and advise on standards and approvals.
*   Identify and recommend mitigation measures to minimize and ameliorate the unavoidable negative impacts of the project and increase beneficial impacts.
*   Recommend a cost effective and efficient long-term Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the life span of the project which includes monitoring, compliance, auditing, safety and contingency planning in line with the EMS ISO 14000 standards.

**1.3 Scope of the EIA**

To ensure a clear understanding and adequate coverage of the relevant issues in the EIA process, a Terms of Reference (TOR), which highlights key project components, general environmental conditions, objectives, and scope, was prepared for the proposed project. In the TOR which was approved by the Lagos State Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources, the scope of the EIA were highlighted and these include the following:

*   Description of the proposed project and associated works together with the requirements for carrying out the proposed project;
*   Identification and description of the elements of the community and environment likely to be affected by the proposed project and/or likely to cause adverse impacts to the proposed project, including both the natural and man-made environment;
*   Identification and quantification of emission sources and determine the significance of impacts on sensitive receivers and potential affected uses;
*   Identification, prediction and evaluation of the residual (i.e. after practicable mitigation) environmental impacts and the cumulative effects expected to arise during the various phases of development;
*   Design and specify the environmental monitoring and audit requirements, if required, to ensure the implementation and the effectiveness of the environmental protection and pollution control measures adopted,
*   Recommend an Environmental and Social Management Program for the life of the development including compliance, monitoring, auditing, and contingency planning in accordance with the ISO 14000 Environmental Management Standard

The EIA process described above and its results are reported in this report. The report thus provides a summary of the pre-project baseline and a description of commitments to be met in the short and in the long term to avoid impacts or reduce these to an acceptable level. The EIA report will remain accessible as a resource document in proponent's office throughout the project life.

**1.4 Legal and Administrative Framework**

A number of national and international environmental regulations guide developmental project in Nigeria. Regulations relating specifically to the planned Land Reclamation Project are as follows:

**1.4.1 National Regulations**

**Federal Ministry of the Environment (Formerly FEPA) Act 58 of 1988**

This Act (formerly a Decree) established the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA) now defunct, as the chief regulatory body for environmental protection in Nigeria. The overall mandate given to the Agency then which has now been transferred to the Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv) is to protect, restore and preserve the ecosystem of the Nigerian environment. To ensure it effectively executes its mandate, the FMEnv developed laws /guidelines on various sectors of the economy. Some of the relevant Laws/ Guidelines relevant to this project are discussed below:

**Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Act Cap E12 LFN 2004.**

In 1992, the Federal Government of Nigeria promulgated the Environmental Impact Assessment Decree No. 86 of 1992 - which has now been amended as EIA Act No. 86 of 1992. This Act makes EIA study mandatory for any major development project and provides the procedure/guidelines for conducting and reporting EIA studies. Specifically the Act stipulates that the public or private sector of the economy shall not undertake or embark or authorize projects or activities without prior considerations, at an early stage of their environmental effects. The Law also categorized projects into three categories for the purpose of efficient administration of the provision of the law. This law is currently the only existing EIA law in the country with the FMEnv as the sole enforcing body. Other legal instruments/guidelines of the Federal Ministry of Environment that are relevant to the proposed project include:

i. Guidelines and standards for environmental pollution control in Nigeria,
ii. National Effluents Limitations Regulation (Regulation S.1.8) which gives the limitations of the concentrations for discharge of substances into land, atmosphere and receiving surface waters.
iii. FEPA (now FMEnv) Guidelines and standards for environmental pollution control in Nigeria 1991
iv. FEPA (now FMEnv) National Pollution Abatement in industries generating waste regulations, 19991 (S.1.8)
v. FEPA (now FMEnv) Waste Management and Hazardous Waste Regulations, 19991 (S.1.15)
vi. FEPA (now FMEnv) Nigeria's National Agenda 21 (1999)
vii. Harmful wastes (Special Criminal Provision) Act No 42 of 1988
viii. National Policy on the Environment (1989)

**National Environment Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency (NESREA) 2007**

The National Environmental Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency (NESREA), an Agency of the Federal Ministry of Environment, Housing and Urban Development is charged with the responsibility of enforcing environmental laws, regulations and standard deterring people, industries and organization from polluting and degrading the environment. It was created by an Act signed into law by President Umaru Musa Yar'adua and this has been published in the Federal Republic of Nigeria Official Gazette No.92, Vol. 94 of 31st July, 2007.

NESREA has the responsibility for the protection and the development of the environment, biodiversity conservation and sustainable development of Nigeria's natural resources in general and environmental technology including coordination, and liaison with, relevant stakeholders within and outside Nigeria on matters of enforcement of environmental standards, regulations, rules, laws, policies and guidelines.

**Nigerian Urban and Regional Planning Act Cap N138, LFN 2004**

The Urban and Regional Planning Act is aimed at overseeing a realistic, purposeful planning of the country to avoid overcrowding and poor environmental conditions. In this regard, the following sections become instructive:

*   Section 30 (3) requires a building plan to be drawn by a registered architect or town planner.
*   Section 39 (7) establishes that an application for land development would be rejected if such development would harm the environment or constitute a nuisance to the community.
*   Section 59 makes it an offence to disobey a stop-work order. The punishment under this section, is a fine not exceeding N10, 000 (Ten thousand naira) and in the case of a company, a fine not exceeding N50, 000.
*   Section 72 provides for the preservation and planting of trees for environmental conservation.

The proposed project shall be implemented in line with requirements of this Act, including obtaining appropriate clearance/ sign off from the Lagos State Ministry of Physical Planning and Urban Development.

**Harmful Waste (Special Criminal Provisions) Act Cap H1, LFN 2004**

The Harmful Waste Act prohibits, without lawful authority, the carrying, dumping or depositing of harmful waste in the air, land or waters of Nigeria. The following sections are notable:

*   Section 6 provides for a punishment of life imprisonment for offenders as well as the forfeiture of land or anything used to commit the offence.
*   Section 7 makes provision for the punishment accordingly, of any conniving, consenting or negligent officer where the offence is committed by a company.
*   Section 12 defines the civil liability of any offender. He would be liable to persons who have suffered injury as a result of his offending act.

The proposed project will not in any way generate hazardous or harmful waste during construction or operational phases except in case of an accidental spillage of oil from machineries being used on site. For this adequate provision shall be made for immediate cleanup of such spill.

**The National Effluent Limitations Regulations S.1.8 of 1991**

This regulation, which was issued in 1991, provides the National Guidelines and Standards for industrial effluents, gaseous emissions, noise, air quality and hazardous wastes management for Nigeria. The National Effluent Limitations regulation makes it mandatory for industrial facilities to install anti-pollution equipment, makes provision for effluent treatment and prescribes a maximum limit of effluent parameters allowed. It also provides that all industries in Nigeria operate by the Best Available Technology (BAT).

**National Environmental Protection (Pollution and Abatement in Industries and Facilities Producing Waste) Regulations, 1991**

The regulation provides general guidelines for the containment of pollution in industries that generate harmful wastes. These regulations include the following:

*   National Environmental Protection (Effluent Limitation) Regulations S.I.8 (FEPA, 1991).
*   National Environmental Protection (Pollution Abatement in Industries and Facilities Generating Wastes) Regulations - S.I.9 (FEPA, 1991).
*   National Environmental Protection (Management of Solid and Hazardous Wastes) Regulation S.I. 15

**Nigerian Ports Authority Act Cap 155, LFN 1999**

Nigerian ports Authority (NPA) was established in 1954 by ports Act (Cap 155 of the law of the Federation of Nigeria amended in 1999 ) as an operating port with the responsibility of providing all port services. This Act provides for the establishment of the Nigerian Ports Authority, defines its functions, powers and liabilities and regulates its internal organization and financial matters. The Act further provides for matters relating to port operations such as pilotage and for the compulsory acquisition of land by the Authority and related matters. The Act consists of 128 sections divided into 15 Parts. It is completed by three Schedules. The Nigerian Ports Authority is established under section 1 as a body corporate. The Authority shall be managed by a Governing Board established under section 2.

Functions and powers of the Authority are defined in Part II (sects. 8-9). The Authority shall provide and operate, in ports, such facilities as it deems appropriate and maintain, improve and regulate the use of the ports in Nigeria. The Minister may, by Order, declare any place in Nigeria and any navigable channel leading into that place to be a port within the meaning this Decree and may declare any navigable channel leading into a port to an approach to that port within the meaning of this Decree (sect. 30). Part V (sects, 24-29) provides for the expropriation of land. Upon application of the Authority the Head of State may compulsory acquire land in the sense of the Land Use Act for purposes of this Decree (sect. 24). The Authority may also enter upon land for the carrying out of specified works.

**The Endangered Species Act, Cap E9, LFN 2004.**

This Act focuses on the protection and management of Nigeria's wildlife and some of their species in danger of extinction as a result of overexploitation. These sections are noteworthy:

*   Section 1 prohibits, except under a valid license, the hunting, capture or trade in animal species, either presently or likely to be in danger of extinction.
*   Section 5 defines the liability of any offender under this Act.
*   Section 7 provides for regulations to be made necessary for environmental prevention and control as regards the purposes of this Act.

Though there are no ecologically sensitive areas like national parks, wildlife sanctuaries or reserved forests within the proposed project route, this project may pass through bushy areas that serve as wildlife habitats which will be impacted by the project. Hence, the project activities will be carried out in a manner that ensures the protection of endangered fauna and flora in compliance with relevant provisions of this Act.

**Land Use Act of 1978**

The Land Use Act (Cap 202, 1990), now Cap L5 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 2004, is the key legislation that has direct relevance to this project. Relevant sections of the law that may relate to this project with respect to land ownership and property rights, resettlement and compensation are summarized in this section. The Land Use Act is the applicable law regarding ownership, transfer, acquisition and all such dealings on Land. The provisions of the Act vest every parcel of Land, in every State of the Federation, in the Executive Governor of the State. He holds such parcels of land in trust for the people and government of the State.

The Act categorized the land in a State to urban and non-urban or local areas. The administration of the urban land is vested in the Governor, while the latter is vested in the Local Government Councils. At any rate, all land irrespective of the category belongs to the State while individuals only enjoy a right of occupancy as contained in the Certificate of Occupancy, or where the grants are "deemed". The concept of ownership of land as known in the western context is varied by the Act. The Governor administers the land for the common good and benefits of all Nigerians. The law makes it lawful for the Governor to grant statutory rights of occupancy for all purposes; grant easements appurtenant to statutory rights of occupancy and to demand rent. The Statutory Rights of Occupancy are for a definite time (the limit is 99 years) and may be granted subject to the terms of any contract made between the State Governor and the Holder.

**Workmen's Compensation Act 1987**

This Act was enacted to make provisions for the payment of compensation to workmen for injuries suffered in the course of their employment. Subject to this Act, a person shall be deemed to be a workman if either before or after the commencement of this Act he has entered into or is working under a contract of service or apprenticeship with an employer, whether by way of manual labour, clerical work or otherwise, and whether the contract is expressed or implied, is oral or in writing.

Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a person shall not be deemed to be a workman if:

(a) He is a person employed under a contract of service or collective agreement approved for exemption by the Minister charged with responsibility for matters relating to labour; or
(b) a person who is employed otherwise than for the purposes of his employer's trade or business, not being a person employed for the purposes of any game or recreation and engaged or paid through a club; or
(c) An outworker; or
(d) A member of the employer's family dwelling in his house; or
(e) A person employed in agricultural or handicraft work by an employer who normally employs less than ten workmen; or
(f) any class of persons whom the Minister may by order published in the Federal Gazette declare not to be workmen for the purposes of this Act.

If in any proceedings for the recovery of compensation under this Act, it appears to the court that the contract of service or apprenticeship under which the injured person was working at the time when the accident causing the injury happened was illegal, the court may, if having regard to all the circumstances of the case it thinks proper so to do, deal with the matter as if the injured person had at the same time aforesaid been a person working under a valid contract of service or apprenticeship.

Except for the purposes of section 16 of this Act, any reference to a workman who has been injured shall, unless the context otherwise requires, where the workman is dead, include a reference to his legal personal representatives, or to his dependents or any of them or the Attorney General of the Federation or such other officer as the Minister may appoint to act on behalf of the dependents of the workman.

**Standard Organization of Nigeria (SON)**

The Standards Organization of Nigeria (SON) was established by an Enabling Act Number 56 of December 1971 - the Standards Organization of Nigeria cap 412 of the laws of Federal Republic of Nigeria, with a commencement date of 1 January 1970, when the Organization started to function. The Act has three amendments: Act Number 20 of 1976, Act Number 32 of 1984 and Act Number 18 of 1990. SON's governing body is known as the Nigerian Standards Council. This is the Policy making body for supervising the administration and financial management of the Organization. The Director General of the Organization is the Chief Executive whose responsibilities revolve around the day-to-day administration of the Organization within the broad guidelines approved by the Council.

The mandate of the Organization includes preparation of Standards relating products, measurements, materials, processes and services amongst others and their promotion at National, Regional and International levels; certification of products, assistance in the production of quality goods and services; improvement of measurement accuracies and circulation of information relating to standards.

Standards Organization of Nigeria (SON), formally known as the Nigeria Standards Organization, is the apex standardization body formed in 1971 under Decree No. 56 to standardize methods and products in Nigeria's industries. In 1984, the name of the organization was changed from Nigeria Standards Organization to Standards Organization of Nigeria (SON) following the amendment of the Decree. This was to eliminate conflicting identity with the then Nigerian Security Organization (NSO). A further amendment of the Decree occurred in 1991 granting SON the power to seize and confiscate substandard products. The enactment, as amended, forms the legal framework put in place by the federal government to enhance the actualization of consumer protection in Nigeria.

Standards Organization of Nigeria (SON) is assigned specific functions under the section 4 of the Act which includes, inter alia, the duty;

*   to compile an inventory of products requiring standardization, and Nigerian standards specification;
*   to organize tests and do everything necessary to ensure that-companies/ manufacturing firms comply with standards designed and approved by the Council;
*   to register and regulate standards, marks and specifications;
*   to investigate the quality of facilities, materials and products in Nigeria and establish quality assurance systems including the certification of factors, products and laboratories;
*   to develop methods for testing of materials, equipment, and items including those purchased by federal or state government or private establishments;
*   to prepare and distribute standard samples;
*   establish and maintain laboratories and institutions necessary for carrying out its functions under the Act

**Sea Fisheries ACT, CAP S4, LFN 2004.**

The Sea Fisheries Act makes it illegal to take or harm fishes within Nigerian waters by use of explosives, poisonous or noxious substances. Relevant sections include the following:

*   Section 1 prohibits any unlicensed operation of motor fishing boats within Nigerian waters.
*   Section 10 makes destruction of fishes punishable with a fine of N50.000 or an imprisonment of 2 years.
*   Section 14 (2) provides authority to make for the protection and conservation of sea fishes.

**Customs and Excise Management Act 2004**

CEMA Cap 45, law of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 2004 vests Legal Authority in the Nigerian Customs Service to act on behalf of the Federal Government of Nigeria in all custom matters. The Coastal and Inland Shipping (Cabotage) Act, Cap C51, LFN 2004 (Cabotage Act) aims primarily to reserve the commercial transportation of goods and services within Nigeria coastal and inland waters to vessels flying the Nigerian flag owned and crewed by Nigerian citizens and built in Nigeria. The Cabotage Act regulates the participation of vessels in Nigeria's coastal trade and is administered by MIMASA.

**The Hague Rules, enacted into Nigerian Law by the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, Cap C2, LFN 2004 (COGSA)**

This law regulates the carriage of goods by sea in ships from any part in Nigeria. The COGSA expressly provides that the Hague Rules apply in respect of outward carriage of goods from ports in Nigeria to ports outside Nigeria or to other ports within Nigeria.

**Inland Fisheries Act, CAP 110, LFN 2004.**

The Act focuses on the protection of the water habitat and its species, the following sections are instructive: Section 1 prohibits unlicensed operations of motor fishing boats within the inland waters of Nigeria. Section 6 prohibits the taking or destruction of fish by harmful means. This offence is punishable with a fine of N3.000 or an imprisonment term of 2 years or both.

**Water Resources Act, CAP W2, LFN 2004.**

The Water Resources Act is targeted at developing and improving the quantity and quality of water resources. The following sections are pertinent: Section 5 and 6 provides authority to make pollution prevention plans and regulations for the protection of fisheries, flora and fauna. Section 18 makes offenders liable, under this Act, to be punished with a fine not exceeding N2000 or an imprisonment term of six months. He would also pay an additional fine of N100 for everyday the offence continues.

**Oil in Navigable Waters Act, CAP 06 LFN 2004.**

The Oil in Navigable Waters Act is concerned with the discharge of oil from ships. The following sections are significant: Section 1 (1) prohibits the discharge of oil from a Nigerian ship into territorial waters or shorelines. Section 3 makes it an offence for a ship master, occupier of land, or operator of apparatus for transferring oil to discharge oil into Nigerian Waters. It also requires the installation of anti-pollution equipment in ships. Section 6 makes punishable such discharge with a fine of N2, 000 (Two thousand naira). Section 7 requires the records of occasions of oil discharge. This law becomes relevant because the dredger is considered as a vessel that will be operating on navigable waters.

**1.4.2 State Regulations**

**Lagos State Environmental Management and Protection Law 2017**

This law harmonizes the various environmental laws of the State. The law clearly highlights the powers of the Ministry as well as some of the mandate of the Ministry. Some of the Powers of the Ministry include:

*   3 (1) For the purpose of full implementation and enforcement of this Law, the Ministry shall, without prejudice to other powers conferred on it by the Honourable Commissioner for Environment and any programmes in Lagos State.
    *   collaborate, consult and cooperate to the maximum extent practicable with any Federal agency, State and Local Government, statutory bodies and research agencies on matters and facilities relating to environmental protection.
    *   on regular basis, promote cooperation in environmental sciences and technologies with appropriate Federal Agencies, relevant State Ministries and Agencies in other countries and international bodies connected with the protection of environment.
    *   Promote sustainable conservation and ecological policy for the State including but not limited to promotion of aesthetics, biodiversity, parks and gardens, landscaping and forest conservation.
*   The Ministry shall provide technical assistance to other institutions and individuals on all environmental matters.
*   In the formulation of policies on environmental matters in the State, the Ministry shall:
    *   harmonize Environmental Law of Lagos State
    *   Integrate sustainable development principles in the policies of the State and advise the State on appropriate location for citing environmental projects/programmes across the state among its other functions;
    *   offer advice to the State Government on projects/programmes with socio economic and environmental impact as it may consider necessary or as may be referred to it from time to time;
    *   be responsible for formulation of legislation, standards and regulations of environmental matters in Lagos State;
    *   formulate guidelines for discussion fostering inter-ministerial and inter-agency discussions on environmental matters of Lagos State;
    *   adopt measures towards having a healthy and business friendly environment in Lagos State;
    *   consider all matters referred to it by the State Executive Council, the general public, association and groups etc.;
    *   execute other environmental functions and programmes as may be assigned to it by the Executive Governor of Lagos State;
    *   liaise with the Agencies of other tiers of Governments including the Federal Government and donor agencies in the execution of its environmental policies;
    *   ensure and integrate public awareness and public participation mechanisms in its decision-making processes with a view to ensuring that the general public is enlightened and afforded opportunity to contribute to environmental matters;
    *   promote investment in waste management and development of waste management infrastructure; and
    *   collate and process data on waste generation and management as well as provide analysis on impact of waste and waste management on the environment.
*   Perform oversight responsibilities on the agencies and authorities enumerated in section 2(1) of this section.

**Lagos State Urban and Regional Planning and Development Law of 2010**

The law provides for the administration of physical planning, urban development, urban regeneration and building control in Lagos State and for connected purposes. Under the new law, three physical planning and development agencies were incorporated, these are:

*   Lagos State Physical Planning Permit Authority
*   Lagos State Building Control Agency; and
*   Lagos State Urban Renewal Agency.

With respect to the planned project, the proponent is expected to engage/consult with the Lagos Ministry of Physical Planning and Urban Development for guidance on obtaining requisite approvals.

**Lagos State Physical Planning Permit Regulations, 2019**

This Regulation was made pursuant to the provisions of the Lagos State Urban and Regional Planning and Development Law, Cap U2. Some of the provision include: Application for Planning Permit.

(1) Any person, Corporate Body, Federal, State and Local Government or its Agencies intending to carry out any development on any land within the State shall apply to the Lagos State Physical Planning Permit Authority (otherwise referred to as "the Authority") for a grant of Planning Permit for such development.
(2) All physical developments in the State shall have an approved Planning Permit.
(3) All Planning Permits to be granted shall be within the context of an approved Operative Development Plan (master/local plan) where available. Where there is no Operative Development Plan, application shall be considered on the result of the planning information application process. All applications for planning permit shall be for Planning Permit, submitted in hard copy and soft copy through on-line e-Planning Permit website www.lagosepp.com.ng or ePlanning Permit Portal Centres, or any other portal as may be prescribed by the Authority The application(s) for development shall be made as appropriate by the Developer in Application Form for Planning Permit as prescribed in Schedule 1 to this Regulation or as described on the portal site for e-Planning Permit. All applications for Planning Permits shall be accompanied by soft copy and hard copy of the following documents:

(i) one (1) set of architectural drawing;
(ii) duly signed survey plan;
(iii) title document(s).

**The Land Use Act 2000 of Lagos State**

The Land Use Act 1978, it must be said, has not destroyed or fundamentally altered the concept of land ownership in Nigeria that was in existence before its promulgation in 1978. Even though in theory by section 1 of the Act, the land that is comprised in the territory of each state is vested in the Governor of the State, the concept of communal, family and individual ownership of land has not been destroyed and the governor cannot take the land of any individual unless the land is required for public purpose. If the acquisition were not for public purpose, it would be declared invalid. The Land Use Act is a nebulous legislation in the sense that in theory the radical title to the land is in the Governor but in practice, the radical title in the community, family and individual has been maintained and preserved only with the requirement that alienation of these interests must be with the consent of the Governor. This led to the enactment of Land Use Act of 2000 by the Lagos State Government.

**Waterfront Infrastructure Development Law, 2003**

In a bid to ensure effective regulation of waterfront infrastructure development, sand dealing and dredging operations in Lagos State and for connected purposes, the Lagos State House of Assembly has enacted the law for the regulation of waterfront infrastructure development, sand dealing and dredging operations in the State. The Law was signed into law in the first quarter of 2008.

The law in section 2 empowers the Ministry of Waterfront Infrastructure Development to:

*   Maintain and control land reclamation and extension works along the waterfront
*   Grant operations permit relating to the functions and powers conferred on it under this law
*   Grant permit for sand dealing or sand dredging from within, around or on waterfronts and embankments within the State
*   Grant permit to construct, develop and erect any building or any structure (not being a structure required for water transportation) along the waterfronts within Lagos State
*   Do all such other things as may be expedient for carrying into effect the purpose of this law

**1.4.3 Ikorodu Local Government Bye Laws**

The proposed project site is within the jurisdiction of Ikorodu LGA. The Environmental and Health Department in the LGA enforces compliance with environmental and sanitation Laws within their territorial jurisdiction. It is an important stakeholder in the project development planning.

**1.4.4 International Regulations, Conventions/Treaties**

Nigeria is signatory to several international treaties and regulations that govern the environment. Some of these include:

*   World Bank Guidelines on Environmental Assessment (EA) 1991
*   International Union for conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) Guidelines.
*   Convention of Biological Diversity
*   Basel convention on the control of trans-boundary movements of Hazardous wastes and their Disposal.
*   United Nations framework convention on climate change (1992)
*   Convention on the Migratory Species of Wild Animals (Bonn Convention)
*   African convention on the conservation of Nature and Natural Resources of 1969

**The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL)**

This is the main international convention covering prevention of pollution of the marine environment by ships from operational or accidental causes. The MARPOL Convention was adopted on 2 November 1973 at IMO. The Protocol of 1978 was adopted in response to a spate of tanker accidents in 1976-1977. As the 1973 MARPOL Convention had not yet entered into force, the 1978 MARPOL Protocol absorbed the parent Convention. The combined instrument entered into force on 2 October 1983. In 1997, a Protocol was adopted to amend the Convention and a new Annex VI was added which entered into force on 19 May 2005. MARPOL has been updated by amendments through the years. The Convention includes regulations aimed at preventing and minimizing pollution from ships - both accidental pollution and that from routine operations - and currently includes six technical Annexes. Special Areas with strict controls on operational discharges are included in most Annexes.

*   **Annex I Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Oil (entered into force 2 October 1983)**
    Covers prevention of pollution by oil from operational measures as well as from accidental discharges; the 1992 amendments to Annex I made it mandatory for new oil tankers to have double hulls and brought in a phase-in schedule for existing tankers to fit double hulls, which was subsequently revised in 2001 and 2003.

*   **Annex II Regulations for the Control of Pollution by Noxious Liquid Substances in Bulk (entered into force 2 October 1983)**
    Details the discharge criteria and measures for the control of pollution by noxious liquid substances carried in bulk; some 250 substances were evaluated and included in the list appended to the Convention; the discharge of their residues is allowed only to reception facilities until certain concentrations and conditions (which vary with the category of substances) are complied with. In any case, no discharge of residues containing noxious substances is permitted within 12 miles of the nearest land.

*   **Annex III Prevention of Pollution by Harmful Substances Carried by Sea in Packaged Form (entered into force 1 July 1992)**
    Contains general requirements for the issuing of detailed standards on packing, marking, labelling, documentation, stowage, quantity limitations, exceptions and notifications. For the purpose of this Annex, "harmful substances" are those substances which are identified as marine pollutants in the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code (IMDG Code) or which meet the criteria in the Appendix of Annex III.

*   **Annex IV Prevention of Pollution by Sewage from Ships (entered into force 27 September 2003)**
    Contains requirements to control pollution of the sea by sewage; the discharge of sewage into the sea is prohibited, except when the ship has in operation an approved sewage treatment plant or when the ship is discharging comminuted and disinfected sewage using an approved system at a distance of more than three nautical miles from the nearest land; sewage which is not comminuted or disinfected has to be discharged at a distance of more than 12 nautical miles from the nearest land.

*   **Annex V Prevention of Pollution by Garbage from Ships (entered into force 31 December 1988)**
    Deals with different types of garbage and specifies the distances from land and the manner in which they may be disposed of; the most important feature of the Annex is the complete ban imposed on the disposal into the sea of all forms of plastics.

*   **Annex VI Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships (entered into force 19 May 2005)**
    Sets limits on sulphur oxide and nitrogen oxide emissions from ship exhausts and prohibits deliberate emissions of ozone depleting substances; designated emission control areas set more stringent standards for SOx, NOx and particulate matter. A chapter adopted in 2011 covers mandatory technical and operational energy efficiency measures aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions from ships.

**1.5 Structure of the Report**

The report is presented as follows:

*   **Chapter One:** Introduction
*   **Chapter Two:** Project Justification & Alternatives Analysis
*   **Chapter Three:** Project/ Process Description
*   **Chapter Four:** Description of the Proposed Project Environment
*   **Chapter Five:** Potential and Associated Impacts
*   **Chapter Six:** Mitigation Measures
*   **Chapter Seven:** Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
*   **Chapter Eight:** Decommissioning/ Closure Plan
*   **Chapter Nine:** Conclusion and Recommendation
*   **References**