**CHAPTER TWO: PROJECT JUSTIFICATION AND ALTERNATIVES**

This section of the report provides the justification for the proposed project based on the need, the benefits and the value of the project as well as analyses of the different options and alternatives to the project. The options and alternatives to the project that were considered in the course of the EIA study include No-Project, Delay project and Implement Project as Planned (Go Ahead) Options, while the Alternatives include alternative location and alternative dredging technologies

**2.1 Need for the Project**

The ever-growing maritime industry in Nigeria requires innovative strategy in coping with the business volume. Statistics have shown a steady annual growth in cargo traffic within the Nigerian Ports, which stands between 5.5% - 6.6% (2007 - 2020), This is evident in the increase in the total number of containers recorded between 2014 - 2020 to about 20 million containers. The Ports in Nigeria, especially Lagos, have been stretched to their limits due to this increase in commercial activities. The technical capacity constraints, such as lack of storage space, unavailability of mooring posts, insufficient cargo handling equipment, limit to traffic expansion, etc have continue to stagnate growth within the industry. Provision of efficient services will attract investors to harness the growth potentials in the local industry. This will invariably translate into an economic buoyancy for the Nation at large. But first, the various challenges facing the industry such as the traffic gridlock along the corridors of the Ports, long waiting period for Vessels calling at the Nigerian Ports, etc have to be squarely addressed. The resultant effect of these situations is the loss of productive man-hour, high cost of goods and services within the Country resulting in hyper­inflation. The proposed Container Terminal when completed will address some of the enumerated challenges above in addition to the socio-economic benefits like employment generation, reduction in social vices and malfeasance, additional revenue sources for the Government at various levels, etc.

**2.2 Value of the Proposed Project**

The initial total investment required for this project has been estimated at over 500 Million Naira which include cost of project design, geotechnical survey, land reclamation, construction of shoreline protection/embankment, construction facilities, provision of associated equipment, as well as acquisition of necessary approval/permits including EIA. The project will be funded directly by the core promoters' equity contributions and credit facilities from local Banks within Nigeria. Over 60 percent of the total value of the project would be injected into the local economy bringing about an overall net positive benefit to the nation's economy.

**2.3. Benefits of the Proposed Project**

The proposed Container Terminal development will have a number of benefits. These benefits include;

*   **Creation of Employment Opportunities**
    The proposed project will create direct temporary employment opportunities for skilled and unskilled labour that would be engaged during the construction phase of the project. Additional indirect job opportunities will be created through service providers such as contractors and suppliers of construction materials. When fully operational, the terminal is expected to create over hundreds of job opportunities in various capacities. This will empower people financially and reduce social vices resulting from unemployment. This benefit is in sink with Government's efforts at reducing unemployment and poverty in the Country.

*   **Stimulation of Economic Growth**
    The injection of over sixty percent of the project cost into the local economy will help in stimulating the economy. Also, the operation of the Container Terminal will help decongest the Apapa and Tin Can Ports thereby facilitating easy movement of goods. This will in turn help in stimulating economic activities.

*   **Decongestion of the Apapa and Tin Can Port**
    The proposed Container Terminal development will help reduce the existing pressure on the Apapa and Tin can Ports. This will to some extent reduce the unprecedented traffic gridlock around the Apapa-Tin Can Corridor occasioned by long queues of Container trucks. Currently, the Apapa Port is experiencing ninety percent yard occupancy which shows there is congestion and longer dwell time for imports.

*   **Reduction in Crime and Social Vices**
    The proposed project through its employment creation potentials will contribute to the reduction in crime and social vices as some of the idle youths that would have hitherto been involved in criminal activities would have been gainfully employed.

**2.4 Envisaged Sustainability of the Proposed Project**

The envisaged sustainability of this project has been carefully evaluated considering four critical components. These include Economic, Environmental, Technical and Social Sustainability.

*   **Economic Sustainability**
    The project proponent has mobilized sufficient fund to ensure a hitch-free implementation of the project. The proposed Container Terminal developed will therefore not be abandoned as result of lack of funds

    In addition, the Project Proponents have been involved in managing other private initiatives in the past and have built an enviable reputation in business environment in Nigeria. There are convincing testimonials of similar projects successfully implemented by the Company

*   **Technological Sustainability.**
    In order to ensure that the impacts emanating from the project activities are mitigated, time-tested standard designs, employing new technology with bias for environmental safety and economics will be adopted in all the phases of the project. The company shall be employing Best Available technology to ensure the project is carried out in compliance with international standards and global best practices. Competent and highly experienced skilled labour shall be employed to handle and manage the project. The project has been designed to meet all requisite local and international engineering code and standards. All relevant engineering codes and safety standards shall be strictly adhered to during the project construction and operational phases.

*   **Environmental Sustainability**
    The project implementation principle shall focus significantly on minimization of negative environmental and social impacts and utilization of local skilled labour. Also, Environmental, public safety and health considerations shall be given adequate attention while appropriate mitigation measures and Environmental and Social Management Plan shall be carefully implemented. It is important to state that the project implementation shall comply with international and national environmental standards and regulations,

*   **Social Sustainability**
    The project proponent as a critical component of the Company's policy shall ensure consultation of all relevant stakeholders throughout the life span of the project. This is aimed at fostering a cordial relationship with all relevant stakeholders. Also, the proponent intends to consider locals from the host community with the required skills and qualifications to be engaged as skilled and while those without the required skill shall be considered for unskilled labour during the project implementation

**2.5 Project Option and Alternatives**

There are usually several options and alternatives to any project. The selection of a particular option and alternative is premised on several considerations, including the desirability/acceptability of the project, the Government policy or inclinations on the project, as well as the socio-economics impact of the project. For the proposed project, a number of options and alternatives were considered and these include; No-Project Option; Delayed Project Option; Alternative Technology and Alternative Location. A summary of these alternatives is presented as follows

**2.5.1 Project Options**

For any given project, there are series of options to consider before embarking on the proposed project. For the proposed dredging and land reclamation project, these options were carefully considered. The options include the following:

*   No project Option
*   Delay project Option,
*   Go Ahead' or Implement Project as planned option

**2.5.1.1 No Project Option**

This option assumes that the project will not take place. The implication of this option is that the proposed Container Terminal development will not take place as planned. Going by this option, all the pre-implementation planning, and other pre-project investments would go down the drain. By extension it also means that the socio-economic benefits that would have emanated from the project will no longer be possible and current congestions being experienced at the Apapa and Tin Ports will continue. This option is usually considered either when the environmental implications of the project are too grave to allow, or when the economics are not viable enough. However, for the proposed project, the negative impacts can be adequately mitigated. In fact, the Socio-economic benefits anticipated far outweigh the expected negative impacts. Therefore, the no-project option in this case should not be considered.
**Decision: NOT RECOMMENDED**

**2.5.1.2 Delay Project Option**

This option implies postponing the planned project until a later date. Such options are usually adopted when prevailing conditions are unfavourable to project implementation, such as during a war, when host communities are deeply resentful of the project, or if the economics of the project are unacceptable or unattractive, then a delay may be feasible. But none of these conditions are applicable to this project, On the contrary, both the economics and the political environment are favorably disposed towards the project. The implication, therefore of delaying the project will mean that all processes that have been put in place for the project design and implementation, contractors and/or workers that have been mobilized for this project will have to be demobilized. Also, because of the inflationary trends in economy, such a delay may result in unanticipated increases in project costs, leading to a decrease in final profit accruable from the project.
**Decision: NOT RECOMMENDED**

**2.5.1.3 Alternative Project Concept**

i. **Expansion of the Existing Ports**
The expansion of the existing ports at Apapa and Tin can was considered. This was considered not to be feasible as a result of the following:
*   Lack of land space
*   Urban density precludes land acquisition
*   Efficiency would diminish because of extreme traffic congestion

ii. **Investment in Non-Port facilities (Land freight or Air cargo)**
This is also not a preferred alternative due to the following:
*   The cost air of transport to substitute for container shipment would be exorbitant
*   The existing poor state of road infrastructure in Nigeria and the lack of reliability in transshipping goods by road through ports in neighboring countries such as Benin.
**Decision: NOT RECOMMENDED**

**2.5.2 Project Alternatives**

For any given project, there are usually a series of alternatives that can be considered during the planning stage of the proposed project. In selecting an alternative, due consideration is usually given to:

*   The cost effectiveness,
*   Environmental friendliness,
*   The suitability for the particular project area,

The alternatives that are usually considered before selection include:

*   Alternative Technology,
*   Alternative Site /Location.

For the proposed project, the alternative considered is alternative location.

**2.5.2.1 Alternative Site/Location**

The focus of the proposed project is to create a state-of-the-art export Container Terminal to support shipping activities. The proposed project site fits perfectly into the required land space and location, therefore making the selection of an alternative location unnecessary. The selected location is considered the optimal one in realizing the objectives of the proposed project and it is therefore recommended to proceed as planned but with all the recommended mitigation measures put in place.

**2.5.2.2 Go Ahead or Implement Project as Planned Option**

This Option implies that the project proponent should go ahead to implement the project as planned. Lagos State is already positioned has a mega city that will require major development with all amenities available. By choice, the go ahead or implementation of the proposed project as planned will be the best option. This is in view of the various benefits of the proposed project as earlier enumerated.