### **CHAPTER THREE: PROJECT / PROCESS DESCRIPTION**

This chapter presents a description of the proposed cuddle development project. It provides an overview of the location, design overview, implementation phase activities, materials requirement, utilities and services, waste generation and management, man power requirement as well as Emergency Response and Health Safety requirements.

### **3.1 Proposed Project Location**

The proposed project site is located at Ipakodo / Ebute-LGA waterfront of the Lagos Lagoon, in Ikorodu Local Government Area of Lagos State and falls on the Geographical Coordinate: N 6° 36' 22.75" and E3° 28'38.07". The project site is located at an estimated 1km and 1.5km to the Nigeria Customs Service Ikorodu Lighter Terminal and Lagos State Ferry Terminal respectively. The site shares common land boundary with some residential property on the western, eastern and southern parts while the northern part is basically a Lagoon through which the shipment of containers will be made to the proposed terminal, Within the immediate vicinity on the western part of the proposed site, are Dangote Pasta, Flour and Noodles production facilities.

The proposed project area is a mixed land use comprising majorly of residential and commercial development. In addition to the Government Lighter terminal facility in proximity to the proposed project site, there also exist other similar container terminal facilities located at an estimated 5-6km away along Ibeshe waterfront of the project area. The proposed project has a life span of 50 years, and may be extended as the needs arises. Map 3.1 and 3.2 show the Administrative map of Lagos State and Ikorodu respectively showing the project area.

#### **Land Requirement**

The proposed container terminal project will be developed on approximately 23.893 hectares of space consisting of dry land and water bodies. The existing dry land area of the site is less than 2 acres of land and the water body abutting this area will be reclaimed to achieve the required 20 hectares of land space for the development of the terminal as shown in the attached Survey Plan for the project. Part of the existing land area of the proposed site (Origin jetty) was formerly used as a passenger jetty before it was acquired by GK&A Logistics Services for the intended container development with all documentation with respect to the ownership of the land having being completed.

The assessment of the project site indicates that the proposed terminal can be developed within the purview of existing legal and regulatory framework for such infrastructure development. Furthermore, our review indicates that GK&A Logistics Limited can proceed with the development of the project as planned ( as previously explained in chapter 2 of this EIA report), provided that all the required approvals, permits (including EIA) and consents are obtained, Subject to the foregoing, it is expected that there will be no other possible legal, regulatory, administrative constraints or impediments that could be hindrance to successful execution of the project at the selected location.

### **3.2 Proposed Project Overview**

The proposed project involves construction and operation of a bonded and EPT container terminal with design capacity to handle more than 10,000 TEUs of containers in transit at any given time. The proposed project is a private sector initiative aimed at assisting the Nigerian Ports Authority (NPA) in the provision of technical capacity and logistics support to the sea ports in Nigeria through the development of container holding terminal in a strategic location to help shippers move their container cargoes with ease and away from the persistent Apapa gridlock.

Shipping container cargo arriving from the point of first discharge at Apapa and Tin-Can Ports in Lagos shall be received in the proposed terminal using barge transportation on the Lagos Lagoon, The containers are then stored in the terminal until they are required to be moved to different destinations and end user places across the country via road trucks upon the completion of necessary assessment by relevant authorities including inspection and payment of customs duty at the terminal. The project is anticipated to improve the turn-around time for Vessels calling at the Nigerian Ports, as space will be freed up for more import activities.

The proposed terminal facility has additional capacity for function and growth because of the way it has been designed. The project when completed, is anticipated to contribute to a great extent to ameliorating problems of congestion (that have defied solutions) in Apapa ports. The different sizes and type of containers being used in ocean freight today are as shown in Table 3.1, The project development shall involve reclamation of land, construction of wharf, berth, pier and other associated container terminal infrastructure.

**Table 3.1: Types and dimension of ocean freight container**
| Container type | Internal Dimension (L x W x H) m | Cargo weight (kgs) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 20FT General | 5.89 x 2.35 x 2.36 | 21,700 |
| 20FT High Cube | 5.89 x 2.35 x 2.69 | 21,700 |
| 40FT General | 12.05 x 2.35 x 2.36 | 26,500 |
| 40FT High Cube | 12.05 x 2.35 x 2.69 | 26,500 |

### **3.3 Proposed Project Component**

The key components of the proposed container terminal project are as follow:
*   Shoreline protection infrastructure
*   Terminal area including quay wall, yards areas, equipment such as cranes and other supporting facilities
*   Generator house
*   Administrative office for Customs inspection and clearance
*   Associated terminal operation utilities (Gate house, Waste Collection and Treatment Facilities, Warehouses and Technical workshop/Maintenance area, truck and car lots mainly for Top management staff of the GK&A Logistics Limited, Weighbridge (1) at the entrance of the terminal, Borehole system for water supply, Storm water drainage including oil water separators, Lifesaving appliances, Power supply (1000kVA back-up diesel generators), and First Aid/ Site Clinic
*   Security equipment (High security perimeter fence of 1600m conforming to ISPS; access control equipment; Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) system; metal detectors; Electronic gates fitted with speed barriers; High mast lighting for proper illumination)

### **3.4 Basis for Design**

The basis for design adopted in the proposed bonded terminal project combined quality assurance with applicable standards and codes to achieve the most economical and environment friendly project. The following factors were put into consideration to define the space requirement for the proposed terminal:
*   Container size, standard TEU
*   Weight of Container(Standard)
*   Maximum Staking (Standard)
*   Allowable Maneuvering Space
*   Bearing Capacity of the container Stacking Area

#### **Proposed Project Design Features**

The proposed terminal has design capacity to handle more than 10,000 TEUs of container cargo and is projected to handle about 5.91% of the total container cargo being handled by Apapa and Tin Can ports annually. The terminal shall be equipped with Information Technology (IT) system consisting of the Terminal Operation System (TOS), Tide works and various other applications for data exchange between different parties involved in the transport chain within the terminal including the customs, The TOS tracks the status of all containers and handling processes. The terminal has one quay with a total length of 140m and capable of handling two barges at a time. Behind the back reach of the STS is the main container storage area where containers are handled with two RMG-cranes.

#### **Applicable Standards and Code**

The design of the proposed bonded terminal project shall comply with applicable laws, Codes of Practices, industry-published guidelines, International Convention, Protocols and International Agreements to which Nigeria is a party, Specifically, the engineering design, Standards and, procurement and installation of the project shall be in accordance with NPA guidelines on construction and operation of terminal/jetty and barge operations. Th proposed project shall comply with the following construction codes:
*   National Building Codes, 2006
*   Nigeria Industrial Standards (NIS) specifications
*   Lagos State Fire Service guidelines
*   GK&A Logistics Limited's adopted Design and Engineering Practice (DEPs
*   Facility design manuals of GK&A Logistics Limited
*   International Building Code IBC (ICC, 2003a)
*   International Energy Conservation Code (ICC, 2003c
*   IS 13997 -1994 -Grade "B" Material
*   ISPS Codes
*   ISO 6346:1995 Freight containers-coding, identification and marking
*   ISO 3874 - Freight containers - Handling and securing
*   EAU 2004: General Maritime structure-Recommendations of the committee for water front structures, harbour and waterways
*   ISO 668 - Freight containers - Classification, dimensions and ratings
*   BS 6349: Part 1 General criteria; Part 2 Design of quay, jetties and dolphins; Part 4 Code of practice for design fencing and mooring systems
*   BS 8004: Code of practice for foundations
*   Nigeria Standard for civil Engineering
    *   NIS 1SO 1920-1: 2004, Part 1: Sampling of fresh concrete
    *   NIS 1SO 1920-3:2004: Part 3: Testing of concrete: Making and Curing Testing Specimens
    *   NIS 1SO 1920-3:2004: Part 6: Sampling, preparing and Testing of Concrete
    *   IS 383:1970 - Specification for coarse and fine aggregates from natural sources for concrete/Test methods and standards for concrete practice
    *   CSA A23.3-Design of concrete structures
    *   CSA A23.1/A23.2: concrete materials and method of concrete construction
    *   IS 455:1989 Specification for Portland slag cement
    *   IS 456:2000 Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete
    *   IS 457:1957 Code of practice for general construction of plain and reinforced concrete for dams and other massive structures
    *   IS 516:1959 Method of test for strength of concrete
    *   IS 650:1991 Specification for standard sand for testing of cement
    *   IS 1199:1959 Methods of sampling and analysis of concrete
    *   IS 1343:1980 Code of practice for prestressed concrete
    *   Standards Organisation of Nigeria (SON) guidelines

### **3.5 Description of Project Development Phases**

The proposed project development is divided into two main stages which are as follows:
*   Stage 1: Reclamation of water body to create the required land space for the construction of the proposed container; and
*   Stage 2: Construction of container terminal facility on the reclaimed land.

The two development stages will be implemented in four (4) phases involving pre-construction/reclamation phase, construction phase, operational phase and decommissioning phase. This EIA has taken cognizance of the environmental sensitivities of the project environment as it concerns each and every activity that shall be undertaken in the course of implementing the project. This is to as much as possible, ensure the minimization of adverse impacts. The activities that will be carried out during each phase of the project are highlighted as follows:

#### **Pre-Construction Phase**

*   Market analysis survey
*   Land acquisition
*   Project concept development and signing of Agreement with technical partners
*   Feasibility Studies (Environmental Impact Assessment, Geotechnical Studies, Sand Search and Bathymetry/Hydrographic investigation of river bodies, Stakeholders' Consultations)
*   Acquisition of Mining Cadastral zone from Federal Ministry of Mines & Steel Development
*   Grant of necessary Permits in respect of the project including EIA clearance
*   Site preparation and Mobilization of Equipment to site.

#### **Construction Phase**

*   Sand dredging and Reclamation of land
*   Construction of shoreline protection /embankment
*   Concrete deck installation
*   Design and construction pavement of terminal ground
*   Installation of essential terminal operation utilities (Gate house, Waste Collection and Treatment Facilities, Warehouses and technical workshop/Maintenance area, truck and car lots mainly for Top management staff of the GK&A Logistics Limited, Weighbridge (1) at the entrance of the terminal, Borehole system for water supply, Storm water drainage including oil water separators, Lifesaving appliances, Power supply (security light, high mast, 1000kVA back-up diesel generators), and First Aid / Site Clinic
*   Installation of terminal handling equipment

#### **Operation Phase**

*   Container receipt, loading and unloading
*   Container stacking
*   Traffic control
*   Customs inspection operation
*   Cargo clearing
*   Maintenance activities
*   Security and HSE operations
*   Waste generation and management

#### **Decommissioning phase**

*   Decommissioning of terminal equipment and infrastructure
*   Transportation of demolition rubbles
*   Restoration of site to its original status
*   Proposed project duration

#### **3.5.1 Pre-construction Phase**

This phase covers activities that will be performed prior to the construction of the terminal. These include the following:

**Project Initiation Stage/Concept Development**
The proponent (GK&A Logistics Limited) came up with concept of bonded terminal project and subsequently prepared Project Concept Document (PCD) that provided as it were project development, investment consideration, financial analyses and implementation plan. The was followed by feasibility studies which were conducted to ascertain the suitability and sustainability of the selected location along Ipako/Ebute-lga waterfront, Ikorodu for the intended project.

**Feasibility Studies**
In line with relevant statutory requirements, the proponent commissioned the implementation of studies to obtain relevant data and information for the Permits and the proposed project development. The studies commissioned include Environmental Impact Assessment, Geotechnical Sand Search study, Bathymetric/Hydrographic studies etc and these were carried out on the Lagos Lagoon around the proposed project area. Feasibility studies show that the intended reclamation and bonded container terminal development can be achieved in an environmental and economic sustainable manner, and that there is available technology to be deployed with minimal impact on the environment. The benefits of the proposed project include revenue generation, amelioration of problems of congestion (that have defied all solutions) at Lagos main ports, jobs and employment creation.

**Stakeholders Consultation**
All relevant stakeholders to the proposed project including regulatory bodies, project host community and contractors etc shall be identified. Consultation and meeting will be held to discuss the plan of the proponent to build and operate a bonded terminal facility at the proposed location. These consultations will ensure that all stakeholders are notified and carried along while pathways and schedules are clearly defined. The benefits of consultation/meetings are to ensure that the proposed project is carried out within the minimally possible time frame to ensure society goodwill and social license to execute the project and also to ensure that there was no conflict with government's plans and policy with regard to the project area.

**Mobilisation of Equipment and Personnel to Site**
Upon the completion of all necessary feasibility studies and acquisition of all required Government's Permits including EIA approval, the dredging contractor will mobilise necessary machinery and personnel to the site to commence reclamation work. The project development will require the use of both land and water-based equipment which will be sourced locally. Construction personnel shall be mobilised to the site by road only while equipment will be delivered to the site by land and water (through the Lagos Lagoon). The proponent shall ensure that all equipment adhere to the project's standards for noise and air emissions and be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specification. The primary equipment for the reclamation is Cutter Suction Dredger and Spread. Key equipment, machinery and materials that will be mobilised for the reclamation and terminal facility construction work are presented in Table 3.2 while the required personnel are show Table 3.3

**Table 3.2: List of equipment, machinery and material for dredging and reclamation**
| S/N | Item | Mode of transportation |
| :-- | :--- | :--- |
| 1 | Cutter Suction Dredger (CSD) | Waterway-towed by tugboat |
| | Tugboat | Waterway-self propelled |
| | Multicat | Waterway-self propelled |
| | Workboat | Waterway-self propelled |
| | Ramp Barge | Waterway-towed by tugboat and Multicat |
| | Fuel Barge | Waterway-towed by tugboat and Multicat |
| | Spray Ponton | Waterway-towed by tugboat and Multicat |
| | Survey Launch | Road |
| | Local Speed Boat | Waterway-self propelled |
| | Dredging discharge pipes | Road |
| | Barge mounted Backhoe | Waterway-towed by tugboat |
| | Excavator CAT 325 | Via Barge |
| | Bulldozer CAT D6R | Via Barge |
| | Compactor | Road |
| | Wheel Loader CAT 966 | Via Barge |
| | Mobile Site Office(Porta cabin) | Road |
| | Concrete mixer Trucks(Terminal and berth construction) | Road |
| | Concrete Slab Mixer | Road |
| | Crane | Road |
| | Water and fuel storage tanks | Road |
| | Electric power generator | Road |

#### **3.5.2 Construction Phase**

This phase covers the actual reclamation and terminal construction activities. It essentially involves dredging of sand from the marked out borrow area and filling of the proposed site as marked out (in red colour) in figure 3.4. It also includes all activities involving construction of the terminal itself on the land created through reclamation.

**Dredging and Reclamation Activities**
Prior to commencement of any form of works on site, the site boundary shall be re-established to ensure that lands not acquired by the proponent are not encroached upon.

**Dredging**
Cutter Suction Dredger (CSD) will be deployed for the proposed dredging and reclamation works. A cutter suction dredger cuts hard cuts hard soil into fragments with a rotating cutter head, The selection of Cutter suction dredge for the proposed dredging is based on the following factors:
*   Physical characteristics of material to be dredged;
*   Quantities of material to be dredged;
*   Depth of the sand winning area;
*   Distance to disposal area;
*   Physical environment of and between the dredging site and disposal area;
*   Contamination level of sediments;
*   Potential disposal alternative

It is also selected due to the fact that wave heights around the proposed sand winning area are not excessive compare to the situation on the far southern part of the Lagoon. Because it is equipped with a rotating cutter apparatus surrounding the intake end of the suction pipe, it can efficiently dig and pump all types of alluvial materials and compacted deposits, such as clay and hardpan.

This dredge has the capability of pumping dredged material long distances to upland disposal sites. The material is sucked up by dredge pumps and discharged to the reclamation area through pipelines. The equipment consist of pontoon, which is positioned with a spudpole at the back and two anchors at the front. The soil is loosened by rotating a cutting head: "the cutter", while powerful inboard centrifugal pump(s) hydraulically transport the loosened soil. The cutterhead, which is hydraulically driven encloses the suction intake of centrifugal dredge pump, The cutterhead is mounted at the extremity of a fabricated steel structure, named the " ladder" which attached to the main haul heavy hinges that permit rotation in the vertical plane. The ladder assembly is lowered and raised by means of a hoisting controlled from the bridge. By means of winches, the cutter ( and therefore the whole pontoon), is pulled in turns to the portside and starboard-side anchor whilst turning on the fixed spud-pole. In this way (part of) a circular movement is made whilst a so-called spud-pole carrier enables a forward movement of the dredger.

The vertical position of cutting head and the ladder can be measured by the any of the following ways:
*   The length of a thin wire connected from the ladder to the pontoon, through heaves etc.
*   Angle between the ladder and the pontoon in combination with draught and trim of the pontoon.
*   The depth of the cutting head can be determined by using pressure readings from specially installed sensors.

The above-mentioned measures make the CSD able to determine how deep and in what the cutting head is used for dredging. After loosening and suction, the soil is pumped into a floating pipeline and a land pipeline. The overall production of CSD depends on many factors, among which: soil characteristics such as situ density, particle distribution and SPT and/or CPT values, dredging depth, weather conditions, marine traffic, tides, currents, etc. The CSD operations continue 24 hours a day and 7 days a week. In addition to the CSD.other machinery and equipment that will be deployed during dredging include tugboat, multicat, workboat, rampbarge, fuel barge, spray pontoon, survey launch and local speedboat.

**Sand Burrow Pits and Reclamation Area**
The geophysical investigation involved: (1) hydrographic survey to determine the the dredgeble area, ground bottom profile of the intended borrow pit with transect sections, (2) drilling of geotechnical boreholes to a maximum of 14m to determine minable sand deposit within the lagoon. The bathymetry and geophysical survey of the area to be sandfilled was done between 13th- 31st, March, 2023. All of the data were linked to a geographical location by using the Global Navigation Satellite System to track their positions at the same time.

The bathymetry data shows water depth from 0.46m-5.98m while most part of the proposed fill area is layered with organic mud and clay. The studies also confirm that the quality and volume of sand required for reclamation can be obtained from the area. The studies estimated availability of 1,350,000m3 of sand borrow area with soil type being a loose to medium whitish sand. Water depth within the proposed reclamation area recorded an average depth of 2.3m. An estimated 513,724m3 of sand will be required to raise the area water level and 797,466 m3 to a height of 1.19m in the proposed reclamation area in order to generate the required land space for the container terminal development. The detailed of bathymetry and geophysical report is attached as appendix of this EIA report.

The study recommended the Slots-system of hydraulic mining and cutter suction dredger with ladder of 14-16m while dredging should not be conducted at shoreline to minimise erosion and flooding. Table 3.3 shows geographical coordinates of the boreholes for sand dredging while figure 3.6 shows some of the burrow areas for sand extraction.

**Quality of Sand Material**
The quality of the sand material that be will be used for the reclamation is relatively coarse and has the following advantages:
*   Relatively coarse, hence will provide a relatively high bearing capacity suitable for deck and associated structures
*   Compaction/settlement of sand formation takes place in a rapid manner compared to other type like peat and clay
*   Relatively coarse sand with a low fraction of fine sand has adequate drainage properties for water and high permeability

The proposed filling material shall not contain any of the following substances:
*   Material susceptible to volume change, including marine mud, soil with a liquid limit exceeding 65% or swelling clays and collapsible solids soils
*   Peat, vegetation, timber, organic (A maximum of 5% of organic material, clay and stones is admissible), soluble or perishable material
*   Dangerous or toxic material or material susceptible to combustion
*   Metal, rubber, plastic or synthetic material

**Table 3.3: Geographical coordinate list of the proposed boreholes points (Sample points)**
| Name | Longitude(°) | Latitude(°) | X_Coordinate(m) | Y_Coordinate(m) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| BH01 | 3.480752 | 6.606436 | 553143.4 | 730267.7 |
| BH02 | 3.479711 | 6.6066862 | 553028.3 | 730314.7 |
| BH03 | 3.478813 | 6.607165 | 552929 | 730348.1 |
| BH04 | 3.477818 | 6.607499 | 552819 | 730348.9 |
| BH05 | 3.476819 | 6.607759 | 552708.5 | 730413.6 |
| BH06 | 3.47664 | 6.607369 | 552688.8 | 730370.4 |
| BH07 | 3.477189 | 6.606806 | 552749.5 | 730308.3 |
| BH08 | 3.478132 | 6.606443 | 552853.8 | 730268.2 |
| BH09 | 3.47907 | 6.606149 | 552957.5 | 730235.8 |
| BH010 | 3.480171 | 6.605598 | 553079.3 | 730186.1 |
| BH011 | 3.479436 | 6.605046 | 552998.1 | 730113.9 |
| BH012 | 3.478461 | 6.605332 | 552890.3 | 730145.5 |
| BH013 | 3.477658 | 6.605628 | 552801.5 | 730178.1 |
| BH014 | 3.47656 | 6.606012 | 552680.1 | 730220.4 |
| BH015 | 3.475803 | 6.606523 | 552596.3 | 730276.8 |
| BH016 | 3.47481 | 6.60547 | 552486.7 | 730168.3 |
| BH017 | 3.476147 | 6.60479 | 552634.5 | 730085.3 |
| BH018 | 3.477198 | 6.605206 | 552750.7 | 730131.4 |
| BH019 | 3.477791 | 3.604414 | 552816.3 | 730044 |
| BH020 | 3.478902 | 6.604277 | 552939.1 | 730023.9 |

**Filling**
The reclamation will be done seaward of the existing shore filling shall be carried out by sand pumping using floating pipeline from the CSD. Sand will be extracted from the lagoon bed and pumped as' sand-water' mixture through the pipeline into the fill area. The sand will be pumped to rise above water level to create the intended landspace. Importantly, the progress of the sand-filling works will be frequently monitored by means of topographic surveys and results of this survey will be presented in topographic charts, Discharged sand is expected to quickly settle on the bottom and excessive water in reclamation area will be released into surrounding water area (Figure 3.7). Since discharged material is expected to be course fragment, the released water is unlikely to contain high turbidity. Silt protection curtain will be placed enclosing the excessive water release point if necessary.

**Tidal Data of the Lagoon**
Lagos Lagoon is under the influence of tides but the effect varies at different sections of the Lagoon, and different from the tide in the open ocean. Figure 3.6 shows a sketch of the tidal fluctuation base on a seven-day tidal observation on the Lagos Lagoon around the Ikorodu Lighter terminal near the proposed project site.

The depth on the chart were reduced to the local Chart datum in order to give a more realistic deletion of water in the survey area. The volume computations were made using a project datum (Upper Level) of 1.75m above Local Chart datum. His level is exactly one (1) meter above the highest observed local tide, and is about the level of Ipakdo/Ebute-Iga community itself. Standard datum for elevation in Nigeria is mean Sea Level (MSL), Lagos, lying 2.46m below the top of Federal Survey benchmark No, 1 situated under east signal station, east mole Lagos. In Lagos, chart datum is about 0.3m above LLWS and LAT so that tide height occasionally fall below datum; in such a case it may be considered as a poorly selected datum. Presently, Lagos CD=BM1-2.918M and M.S.L=Chart datum+0.45m. The extract of tidal dat of the proposed project site is shown in the Bathymetry and geophysical report in the appendix section of the EIA report.

**Post Reclamation Phase**
This phase involves leveling of the filled area to the desired topography (which is 1m above the existing elevation of the Oba Sekunmade Road), and demobilisation of equipment and personnel from site. After pumping of sand into the reclamation area, dry plant equipment will be deployed further direct sand-water mixture to obtain the required levels and shape. To calculate and check levels, topographic and bathymetric survey will be done on regular bases, The main dry plant equipment will be deployed at this phase includes; bulldozers, excavators and wheel loaders. Demobilisation of equipment and personnel from site will employ similar transport used mobilisation as highlighted in Table 3.2.

**Soil settlement**
The likely settlement that may arise as a result of loading was estimated using Terzaghi's (1943). Using the parameters obtained from oedometer test in conjunction with the soil properties, the amount of settlement obtained was approximately 251mm. The period required for either 50%(T50) or 90% (T90) of the final foundation settlement was computed using Taylor and Merchant's method. Average of co-efficient of consolidation over the range of pressure involved equaled to 2.31m/yr. T50 and T90 were estimated at 4.885 years i.e 4 years 323 days and 21.135 years, i.e 21 years 49.2 days respectively.

The fill material will be spread and compacted immediately after disposal on site using the appropriate compaction equipment. Fill compaction shall be carried out layer by layer to ensure compliance with the project design specifications and regulatory codes. No allowances shall be made for special (sub-) soil treatment. Due to the sandy nature of the fill material, settlement in time due to any decomposing of organic material is not expected. The compacted sand will be allowed to settle for not less than 2 years before further construction will be carried on the area.

**Shoreline Protection and Erosion Control**
The site reclamation shall be done to ensure good shore protection of the completed profile of the reclaimed land and also to protect leaching of reclaimed material, which could occur due to groundwater flow. The front, left, and right boundary site layout of the reclaimed area will be protected with a retaining wall/embankment of 1.5m above the water level. The retaining wall will be constructed using a pre-cast concrete sheet pile structure which will be drilled into the water.

**Terminal Facility Construction**
The construction phase essentially involves all activities concerning the construction of the terminal facility upon the attainment of the required settling period of the filled area. The terminal facility will cover the existing land abutting the Lagoon at Prince Abiola Kosoko street to the reclaimed land in line with the survey plan. Prior to the start of the construction work, a review and development of Basic Design of the project shall be carried out and this shall be done in accordance with NPA guidelines and international standards for container terminal operations. The site will be zoned/demarcated into different areas such as construction area, fabrication area, camp site, material storage area and utilities area in line with contractor's set of constructions plans. Also, to be undertaken during this stage are development, issuance of documents and all specifications, procedures, drawings and sketches.

**Construction Inputs and Estimates**
Construction materials shall be procured, locally or internationally and transported to the site through road while sand material will be obtained from the water body during dredging. The construction materials will be transported from their extraction, manufacture, or storage sites using transport trucks. All steel material to be used will be fabricated on site. A summary of the materials and quantity required for construction activities is given in Table 3.4

**Table 3.4: Sources and estimates of construction inputs for the proposed terminal**
| Material | Form | Source | Uses | Estimate |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sharp coarse sand (very silty, averagely silty) | Solid | Ibeshe, Ikorodu | Preparation of concrete for joining masonry stone and aggregate | 18,500 tons |
| Plaster sand | Solid | Oreta, Ikorodu | | 7,423m2 |
| Cement (50kg bag) | Solid | Ikorodu, town | Preparation of concrete for joinery purpose and making ballast for Reinforcement concrete | 2000 tons |
| Coarse aggregate Granite stone (3/4", 1/2", 1") | Solid | Locally (Ogere, Ogun State) | | 9756 tons |
| Stones | | Ogere, Ogun State) | Preparation of aggregate for making slabs and Reinforcement concrete | |
| High grade steel reinforcement (25mm, 16mm, 12mm and 10mm) | Solid | Ogijo, Ogun State) | Concrete reinforcement | 1958m2 |
| Pre-cast concrete sheet piles | | | | |
| Timber | Solid | Locally (J4, Ogun State) | Roofing and making doors | 297.01 tons |
| Porcelain tiles and mortal plaster | Solid | Imported (Spain) | Interior fittings | 6,400 tons |
| Molded Block (6" and 9") | Solid | Ipakodo, Ikorodu | Preparation of building wall/skin | 9,939m2 |
| Glass materials | Solid | Ikeja, Lagos | Interior and external fittings | 124 tons |
| Plumbing materials (WC, WHB, pvc pipes) | Solid | Sango, Ogun State | For water distribution within the building | 231.9 tons |
| Hardwood | Solid | Locally | Roofing of building | 225.4 tons |
| Aluminium railings | | Dopemu, Lagos | Building interior fittings | 11.6 tons |
| Water | Liquid | Borehole from the project site and contractor's yard | Construction work | 54m3/day |
| Fuel (diesel, petrol) | Liquid | Petrol retail station around Ipakodo, Ikorodu | To be used for running the generator and materials transport vehicles | 900,234 million liters |
| Paint (water and oil base) | Liquid | Ikeja | Interior and External wall finishes | 44,500m2 |

The structure is designed to support anticipated load associated with terminal operations, such as the stacking of containers, the operation of gantry and mobilecranes, and live loads from the berthing of barges alongside the wharf.

**Yard area**
The terminal yard has a total surface area of 10000 x 22,000m and consist of a Reinforced Concrete Pavement (RCP) surface platform which is joined to the berth. The yard area is a part of the land area reclaimed from the water body. It will be demarcated into sections for different terminal operational activities. The container-stacking yards consist of two berths.

A TEU is unit for measuring container storage such that a space for two 20 foot containers is equivalent to one 40 footer. The apron width would be 60m, 5m of which would be used as the running lane of the yard trucks which load/unload containers when barges are moored alongside the berth. This lane will also be used by trucks that haul reefer containers so that they would not interfere with operations of other trucks running under the gantrycranes.

**Berth/ Quay Wall**
The berths provide a vertical front which allows safe and secure mooring that facilitate the loading and unloading of container from the barge. The influence factors which effected on the structure were taken into consideration in the design of the proposed berth. This includes soil characteristics of the proposed location, environmental conditions and rage of traffic. The berth is expected to receive lateral loads from the berthing and mooring of barges. Berthing forces occur when a barge berths along a deck and transmits the force along the contact length of the fender system. This force is then distributed by the diaphragm actions to the pile bents and this is expected to be transmitted to the retained upland fill, directly to the fill. The proposed quay wall has an approximate total length of 120m and designed to allow three (3) standard barges to berth simultaneously.

Generally, the berth will be of a concrete type as this is more durable and has longer lifecycle than others materials. The berth/quay wall will be constructed using steel sheet piles wall being the most embedded retaining wall elements for container terminal. The piles will be driven to a considerable depth with low displacement and generally involve the following steps:
i. Installation of cased bore piles;
ii. Installation of deck PC elements from the floating pontoon;
iii. Placement of deck reinforcement and cast in situ reinforcement concrete;
iv. Demolition of top existing cap beam;
v. Attachment of anchor wall and placement of tie rod;
vi. Construction of capping beam cast and pavement slab;

**Sheet Pile Driving:** The equipment to be used for this purpose is hydraulic crane with hammer placed on a pontoon in the Lagoon and another on land. This involves driving the sheet piles into the ground to form the quay wall. During the pile driving, an attachment is placed on the pilling hammer to guide the driving direction. Also to guide the quay wall, concrete sheet piles are driven into the ground behind the steel sheet piles and both tied together by 40mm steel rods at 2m centers, and at 3m interval for strength and stability.

**Capping Beam:** The capping beam is an in-situ concrete casting to stabilise the steel sheet pile wall. The pile driving is followed by capping beam work which involve tieing with steel rods 40mm for reinforcement and stabilisation, after which the pre-cast capping elements will then be laid on top of the piles cast in-situ. In-situ concrete casting shall be used to complete the capping beam.

**Mooring Bollard (Anchor) wall and mooring bollard (Anchor) installation:** Mooring bollard wall shall be installed to connect the steel anchor with the capping beam. From both sides, the steel anchors shall be installed and bolted in the middle with two (2) threaded bars and nuts. This installation enhances safe anchoring of barges for subsequent container loading and unloading operations.

**Container Stacking Area**
The zone needed for capacity of holders inside the terminal relies on upon the accompanying elements which are:
i. Annual throughout anticipated that will pass through the terminal;
ii. Dwell time of container inside the terminal. This is the mundane time a container would utilise in the yard after stacking
iii. The kind of container handling equipment utilised for stacking
iv. Average stacking height. The containers are not stacked to the most extreme tallness in all the spaces inside the stacking region. This is obliged to empower the taking care of supplies to get the lower holders in the stack for release,
v. Peaking factor. This is the degree of the crest activity to the average traffic, generally taken in the middle of 1.3 to 1.4.
vi. Ration of working slots. All the slots gave on the ground cannot be accessible for stacking because of different reasons. The degree of working spaces apertures is generally taken as 0.8

**Associated Facilities**
**Administrative Building**
A storey structure will be erected on the terminal. The building which covers approximately 450m2 of the total project land area is located at estimated 10m away on the left side of the entrance gate of the terminal and will be equipped with necessary facilities to serve various purposes. The administrative building would accommodate all functions of the terminal operations except maintenance. Many complex logistical functions of the terminal will be performed in the building. This includes assignment of delivered containers to a storage space location as well as the location and loading or unloading sequence of container by straddlers and holsters. The building will be equipped with electrical installation, tiling, electrical installation, plumbing systems for water supply. In addition, pipe-work will be done to connect the building to the sewage collection facility.

**Fencing and Security**
The entire terminal shall be secured by a high perimeter fence of 1600m conforming to ISPS Codes and lined on top with American type of security wire, to discourage climbing and unauthorized access as well as to safeguard the terminal facility against safety and security related issues. The fence shall be constructed with masonry block with a pedestrian patrolling track along the inside perimeter of the boundary wall for security patrolling.

**Terminal Gates**
The terminal main gate is the entrance into the container terminal. The container gate is located in the inner side of the main gate. The area between the main gate and the container gate is reserved as the waiting zone of external tractors. All the tractors that enter into and get out of the terminal would pass through the container gate. The gate will have one lane in each direction for inbound and outbound trucks. It will be automated to allow for easy registration of license plates and container serial numbers. All entry/exit into/out of the terminal would pass through this gate.

**Access Road**
In order to cope with the increase in traffic volume expected as a result of the project, the existing access road to the project site, i.e Prince Abiola Close (Plate 3.4) will be rehabilitated. The existing drainage systems on both side of the Close will be rehabilitated using interlock stones to ensue effective draining of runoff from Oba Sekunmade Road into the Lagoon. The interlock stones is capable of withstanding pressure arising from truck movement into and out of the terminal premises.

**Weigh Bridge**
To enforce the axle load control limits for the trucks leaving the terminal, a weigh bridge will be installed at the entrance gates. This will ensure that overloaded vehicles are restrained from damaging the new rehabilitated access road and prevented from joining the road network outside the terminal complex.

**Equipment Control System**
The proposed terminal will be equipped with an Equipment Control System (ECS). The ECS is an essential interface between the container handling equipment and the Terminal Operating System (TOS). At the center of the terminal processes, it control each individual piece of equipment, collects and distributes work orders. It works hand-in-hand with the TOS, which oversees the process of the entire terminal.

**Utility Requirement**
The utility requirement for the proposed project are mainly raw materials in form of water electricity, fuel, manpower and sewage collection facilities.

**Power Supply**
The proposed terminal will derive its power from the national grid through Ikeja Electric systems, Electric. A single 1000kVA diesel generator shall also be installed as back-up to meet emergency power requirement during failure from the grid. There is also a future plan to run the entire facility on renewable energy source so as to minimize emission associated climate change.

As part of security monitoring system, lighting system with high mast lighting tower will be installed around the terminal for illumination at night for 24 hours' activities and for security purposes. The installation shall be 23ft-high, with bright yellow to provide an immediate and highly-visible deterrent, helping to prevent intrusions on to the terminal before they occur.

**Fuel Supply**
A large storage of diesel is not anticipated. Diesel will be received in trucks and stored in 500 or 1000 litres above ground and double-wall storage tank. The storage tank area will be surrounded by a concrete bund wall equivalent to the volume of the above ground double-wall storage tank.

**Water supply**
Water supply will be from a borehole which will be drilled on site. Water shall be used for spraying the terminal ground, domestic purpose and fire-fighting and washing of terminal equipment. An estimated 30 gallons of water will be required for terminal operation on a daily basis.

**Storm water drainage system**
The proposed container terminal will be equipped with storm water drainage network to drain the runoff generated from the facility premises into the surrounding water bodies. The drainage system will be a covered type and this consists of reinforced concrete which will be finished to a gentle gradient. Operational area storm water such as workshop and trucking areas will be collected into a coalescence pit, where the contaminated storm water will be treated before discharge into Lagoon.

**Sewage Collection Facility**
A sewage storage tank will be constructed for the collection of human waste generated from the domestic activities and office related waste. All toilet facilities within the building and gate house will be channeled to the sewage facility from where before the waste is evacuated by LASWAMO accredited waste contractor.

#### **3.5.3 Operational Phase**

Operations and services in the proposed container terminal shall be done in a safe, efficient, effective and economic manner, and in accordance with applicable regulations and generally accepted practices, methods, techniques and standards employed internationally with respect to the development, operation, maintenance, personnel and terminal safety and environment protection.

**Terminal Operation Equipment**
As previously explained, the terminal has a designed capacity to handle more than 10,000 TEUs of container per month and will rely on wide range of intermodal handling equipment in order to perform its operation. The equipment will be used mainly for loading and unloading operation. In order to improve the operational efficiency of the terminals, it is important to consider the coordination of different types of container-handling equipment. The terminal handling equipment were chosen using the anticipated volume of container throughput as a base figure. Table 3.5 shows the various container handling equipment for the proposed project. The components of the equipment will be delivered and assembled at the site.

**Table 3.5: List of handling equipment and machinery for operation activities**
| Equipment | Number to be deployed |
| :--- | :--- |
| Empty container handlers | 1 |
| Top handlers | 2 |
| Side handlers | 1 |
| Fork lifts 3.5 tons | 2 |
| Fork lifts 7 tons | 2 |
| Terminal trailer | 2 |
| Yard trucks | 5 |
| Terminal tractor 5 tons | 1 |
| Reach stacker 45 tons | 2 |
| Straddle carriers | 1 |
| Workshop tools | various |

**Forklift:** The forklift is considered the most basic piece of intermodal equipment and will be used to handle 20-foot containers or empty containers of other dimensions only.

**The Holster Truck:** This will be designed to move container loaded on chassis or bomb carts within the terminal. A chassis is trailer designed to carry a container securely with twist locks allowing for road transportation outside the terminal. This will also require other handling equipment.

**The Straddle Carrier:** The straddle carrier is a flexible piece of equipment is used for all intermodal operations such as loading and loading of trucks and stacking containers up to three in height depending on whether the straddle carrier is a 3-high or 4-high. The stacking density varies between 500 and 700 TEU per.

**Front Reach Stacker:** This is a flexible piece of truck equipment used for stacking containers. They are often used for specialised moves such as reefers.

**Terminal Operation Planning**
Generally, operations planning of the proposed container terminal typically, will involve coordinating the movement of six key elements which are:
*   Barge inbound and outbound
*   Quay crane discharging and loading systems
*   Internal transportation and container movement
*   Container yard discharging and loading system
*   Stacking system
*   Gate system; and
*   Inbound and outbound process for containers

**Gate Operations**
All inbound and outbound trucks to the terminal will be through the main access gate. When a truck arrives at the terminal to deliver a container, the container is registered and quickly checked for damages. Also the seal is checked. It is expected that handling of a truck will take about 5 minutes at the gate. Then the truck driver is given a position within the container yard where he has to drive. At that position, the container is stacked into the storage block by and straddle carrier. If the truck is not supposed to pick up another container on the terminal, it leaves the terminal. Once the barge on which the outbound container to the (Apapa or Tin Island port) is supposed to leave the terminal, the container is removed from the storage block and moved to the quay where it is lifted onto the barge to the shipping for final export.

Import containers are lifted from the barge to UTRs by the STS-crane which then moves the container to the storage yard where it is stacked in by an RTG-crane. A container that is supposed to leave by truck is picked up by an external truck directly at the storage block, where it is loaded by RTG.

**Barge Operations**
A barge is a flat-shaped on its bottom, just like a raft. They cannot move on their own but will be towed with a tugboat to/from the shipping port to/from the proposed terminal. Once a container laden barge arrive at the terminal docking area the containers are lifted onto the terminal trailers. The twist locks are removed manually right before the container is positioned on the trailer because roll flat type of trailers are used without notches at the corners. Here also the seal check, the container registration and a quick damage check is performed manually. Between two and three terminal tractors are used to serve the STS.

**Container Storage Operations**
One of the key aspects in container terminal operation is the container-storage block- allocation. The choice of a position for storing a certain container strongly influences the performance of the terminal. The most basic strategy is to segregate stacks for inbound and outbound containers. Containers of different destination and type are stored in different areas. Lagos port inbound containers shall be stored next to the quay to reduce travel times between storage area and STS while the terminal inbound containers will be stored on the eastern side of the terminal in accordance with the project planning arrangement. The containers are stacked from 5 to 9 level heights using the reach-stackers. Stacking height is not limited by regulations but only by available equipment. The first in first out method (FIFO) will be adopted for stacking the container in order to avoid the prolong storage of container in the terminal.

**Road Traffic Management**
It is anticipated that, the number of container trucks circulating along Oba Sekumade Road which the connecting road from the terminal location is expected to increase significantly over the life time of the project due to potential increase in terminal throughput. To this end, vehicular movement shall be organised in such a manner so as not to cause any obstruction to other road users. To this end, a call-up electronic system would be installed to streamline loading and unloading of containers. Basically, traffic control officers would be on hand to effectively take charge of vehicular movement in and around the terminal. Also, it is expected that the project will contribute to increase in the number of barges circulating in the navigation access channel over the lifetime of the project.

**Repair and Maintenance**
There would be deployment of dedicated facility management team that ensures prompt repairs of all terminal facilities and structures. Maintenance operations will involve cleaning of terminal ground, repair and servicing of terminal facilities, handling equipment, generator, cracks on structures, building accessories, amongst others. The maintenance of container handling equipment will be carried at the designated workshop designed for this purpose. Maintenance and repair plan would be developed to organize specific maintenance and repair operations, the ways of implementation of those operations, and points of attention in such implementation, on the basis of the total assessment of checks and diagnosis.

**Health Safety Security and Environment**
The proponent recognize that excellent Health Safety Security Environment (HSSE) performance is key to the success of business as port operators. The business activities within the proposed terminal premises will be conducted in a manner that minimizes adverse health, safety and environmental impacts with the aim of zero distress to people and the environment. The Health and Safety Policy, Environmental Policy Statement, Alcohol, illicit Drugs and Weapons Policy and the Stop Work-Authority Policy will be targeted at ensuring compliance with Applicable Laws concerning health, safety and environment activities.

The proponent's policy on HSE will align with NPA's thought process of benchmarking all policies to comply with International Conventions, regulations, guidelines and national legislations on health, safety and environment such as:
*   IMO Regulations and Compliance with International Safety Management Code
*   OHSAS18001 Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems
*   ISO14001 Environmental Management System- to the level of "Certification - ready"
*   MARPOL International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from ships, 1973 as modified by the protocol of 1978
*   SOLAS Safety of Life at Sea
*   IALA International Association of Marine Aids to Navigation and Lighthouse Authorities
*   ISPS International Ships and Port Facility Security Code

On the part of environmental compliance, the proposed project will comply with all applicable Laws concerning the protection of the environment. Adequate steps shall be taken to prevent and control pollution of the air, land and water by oil, chemicals, emissions, hazardous wastes, effluent solid and other wastes around the terminal premises. A proper Health and Safety Policy will be drafted and signed for the terminal. The Lagos state Fire Service at Odongunyan, Ikorodu will have easy access to the terminal in any emergency. Qualified and certified professional will be engaged to implement the HSSE policy in respect of the project. The HSSE requirement to be put in place will include the following amongst others:
*   Perimeter fencing
*   Functional CCTV coverage
*   Terminal Illumination
*   Facility Access Identification
*   Risk Assessment Reports
*   Communication gadgets
*   Security equipment/ gadgets, e.g.
*   Observation post and metal detectors
*   Marking of restricted areas
*   Regular drills and exercises
*   Emergency response procedure
*   Engagement of reputable security company
*   Report of incidence and accident
*   Display of security level
*   Visitor log book

#### **3.5.4 Decommissioning and Closure Phase**

The proposed project is designed for a life span of 50- year life span. Decommissioning of the facility will be effected when the active life of all the facilities and structures have expired and will involve the removal of all the installed facilities and restoring the land where necessary. Facilities that shall be removed include:
*   Quay structure
*   Terminal platform
*   Container handling equipment
*   Administrative building
*   Utilities such as water and fuel storage tanks, concrete structures, storm water drainage channel

As part of the decommissioning plan, GK& A Logistics Services will develop decommissioning plans which will be submitted to Lagos State Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources and NPA. The plan shall take into consideration the requirement/procedures of Equal Logistics, relevant Nigeria regulation such as Federal Ministry of Environment and NESREA guidelines and prevailing conditions at the time of abandonment.

### **3.6 Waste Generation and Management**

Wastes refer to any material (solid, liquid, gaseous or mixture) that is surplus to requirement. Effective and responsible handling and disposal of waste are key elements of environmental management system. The proposed project activities are anticipated to generate different kinds of wastes during site preparation, construction, operational and decommissioning phases. Waste management shall be carried out in consultation and in line with the waste management guidelines of GK&A Logistics Services Limited.

#### **3.6.1 Waste Generation**

The waste streams from the project are anticipated to range from dredged sediment, kitchen wastes. Consumables, used lube oil, disused vehicle parts etc.

#### **3.6.2 Waste Management**

Equal Logistics shall take all practical and cost effective measures to minimize the generation of wastes, by employing the four R's (Reduce, Reuse, Recycle and Recovery) through process of optimization or design, efficient procedures and good housekeep. Waste shall be managed in the following ways:
*   Waste stream identification
*   Proper waste categorization
*   Waste segregation
*   Appropriate handling and disposal practice; and

Air emission are expected from the operation diesel generators but efforts shall be made by the proponent to ensure that these emissions comply with the most stringent of the Federal Ministry of Environment's Standards, LASEPA, Federal Ministry of Environment/NESREA, WHO and World Bank standards for air quality parameters. Table 3.6 presents the various kinds of waste anticipated from the project activities and their modes of disposal.

**Table 3.6: Summary of wastes and sources anticipated in the proposed terminal**
| Project implementation phase | Type of waste | Sources | Management |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Dredging and reclamation | Dredged sediment | Dredged sediment to be transported from the burrow areas to reclamation site using floating pipes | Approximately, 7,120,000m3 of bottom water sediments dredged from the burrow areas will be used to fill the proposed terminal site. Therefore there will be no challenge of disposal. Pause period of 4 hours shall be observed daily during dredging and pumping of sediment to reduce re-suspension of sediment and trapped toxic materials in lagoon surface. When monitoring results indicate that suspended material are above FMEnv permissible level, the dredger shall be relocated to allow material settlement. Dredging shall be limited to marked out areas. Dredging equipment shall be maintained in proper and efficient conditions. Well maintained floating pipeline shall be used to eliminate or reduce leakage of turbid water. Monitoring shall be carried as recommended in the EMP. |
| | General Solid Waste (Putrescibles) | This category of waste includes putrescible organics. They include materials such as kitchen wastes, fruit peels etc. The type of waste will be generated from the kitchen of dredge. | Putrescible and non-putrescible organics shall be collected in appropriate containers and evacuated by licensed contractor. Waste generated on board of vessel. Waste generated on board of vessels shall be shipped onshore. Waste generated on the deck shall be immediately cleaned up. In the event that waste is lost overboard, reasonable and practicable measures shall be undertaken to retrieve/clean-up the waste as soon as possible. Per Capital generation of putrescible and non-putrescible waste is estimated at 1.0Kg per day. |
| | Non-putrescible waste | This category covers general solid waste. It includes materials like glass, cardboard paper, rubber, plastic, wood, concrete materials, polychloride (PVC) materials etc. Component of this waste | Handling shall be as per MARPOL 73/78 Annex V requirement. |

**Table 3.7: Summary of wastes and sources anticipated in the proposed terminal**
| Project phase | Project activities | Type of emission/waste/pollutant | Quantity |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Preconstruction phase | Mobilization of equipment and transportation of workers to the site | CO, NOx, SOx | 214.7 Ug/m3 |
| | Site preparation | CO, NOx, SOx, paper, plastic bottles, sewage, oil grease | 01 Ug/m3, 2.11 tons |
| Construction phase | Transportation of construction material to the site | CO, NOx, SOx | 263.9 Ug/m3 |
| | Sand dredging and reclamation | Wastewater contaminant, Oily water, plastics, spent oil, CO, N02, Particulate matter | 63.8 tons |
| | Civil works (building, roads, utilities etc) | CO, NOx, SOx, Metal scraps, cement sludge, paper, plastic bottle container, nylon | 481.4 Ug/m3 |
| | Construction/casting of Pier piles and jetty | Metal scrap, Cement sludge | 29.7 tons, 107 ps |
| Operational Phase | Loading and unloading of containers | CO, NOx, SOx, Particulate matter(PM10) | 551.2 Ug/m3 |
| | Cleaning of terminal ground | Oil sludge | 4.11 tons/annum |
| | Restaurant | Domestic garbage | 432 tons/annum |
| | Fuel storage products | Hazardous waste | 33.2 |
| | Domestic activities | Sanitary waste, paper, plastic bottles, sewage, Domestic sewage | 34,560 m3/annum |
| | Maintenance operation | Metal scraps, oil and grease, effluent, waste rags | 2.71MT |
| Decommissioning | Dismantling of structures and ancillary utilities | Metal scrap and cutting, plastics, oil and grease, TSS, particulate matter (PM10) | 1.11MT |
| | Transportation of waste material out of the decommissioned site | CO, NOx, SOXl, particulate matter(PM10) | 1.01MT |

### **3.7 Manpower Requirement**

An organizational structure that assures technical efficiency and administrative expediency will be put in place at the proposed terminal. An estimated 42 personnel consisting of skilled/technical and unskilled workers will be required for dredging and reclamation while a total of 37 workers are anticipated during the operation phase. The terminal construction phase will an estimated 27 workers.

The proposed container terminal will start with trained and skilled professionals for effectiveness and gradually build from there in the near future. The personnel will be paid monthly salary and to this end their emolument will be cost-effective in line with Management cost optimization strategy. Table 3.8 and Table 3.9 present the anticipated personnel required for the project reclamation and operation phase respectively. Priority shall be given to the local (Ebute-lga/Ipakodo) community for the recruitment of qualified workers if they are available. The facility shall run on 8 hours operation per day from Monday to Saturday.

**Table 3.8: Anticipated manpower for reclamation phase of the project**
| Job personnel | Skilled | Unskilled | Total |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Cutter Suction Dredger | 3 | 5 | 8 |
| Tugboat | 2 | 2 | 4 |
| Multicat | 2 | 3 | 5 |
| Reclamation operators | 2 | 5 | 7 |
| Survey staff | 2 | 1 | 4 |
| Operational staff | 4 | | 4 |
| Office staff | 2 | 2 | 4 |
| Driver | | 6 | 6 |
| **Total** | | | **42** |

**Table 3.9: Anticipated manpower for operation phase of the project**
| Personnel | Quantity |
| :--- | :--- |
| Terminal Manager | 1 |
| Operation Manager/Sec. Manager | 2 |
| Administrative officers | 3 |
| Account officers | 2 |
| Container equipment handler (Forklift, reach carrier, straddle carrier, terminal truck drivers etc) | 12 |
| Clerical staff | 6 |
| Certified Port Facility Security Officer (PFSO) | 9 |
| Cleaners/Messengers | 2 |
| **Total** | **37** |

### **3.8 Proposed Project Schedule**

The overall time estimated for procurement, delivery, installation, testing and commissioning of the proposed project is estimated at maximum one year. However, the actual commencement date will be dependent on the conclusion of all the approval/ permit processes. The proposed project implementation schedule is presented in Table 3.10. Some of the activities could be carried out simultaneously. These activities can overlap each other so that actions can be carried out expeditiously and results achieved on time. It is also pertinent to mention that certain activities may be adjusted in terms of priority where feasible, while some may be deferred if the need arises.

**Table 3.10: Proposed Project Implementation Schedule**
| Project phase | Project activity | Implementation period (based on 50-year life span) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | | **2022-2023** | **2023-2073** | **2074** |
| Pre-construction | Engineering consultancy services, geotechnical investigation (Bathymetry/Topographic survey and Sand Search) | X | | |
| | Acquisition of terminal operation handling equipment | X | | |
| | Stakeholder engagement | X | | |
| | Mobilization of equipment and transportation of workers to the site | X | | |
| | Site preparation | X | | |
| Construction | Dredging and land reclamation | X | | |
| | Construction of pre-cast sheet piles | X | | |
| | Construction of jetty/wharf/container platform | X | | |
| Operation | Gate operation, Vessel operation, Yard/container storage operation, Traffic control, Customs inspection operation, Maintenance activities, Security and HSE operations | | X | |
| Decommissioning | Removal of terminal facility and associated infrastructure, Removal of utility infrastructure and services | | | X |
| | Transportation of demolition rubbles | | | X |\