### **CHAPTER FIVE: Potential and Associated Impacts**

**5.1 Introduction**

This chapter discusses the potential and associated impacts of the proposed project on the environmental, health and socio-economic characteristics of the project area. It equally presents an overview of the impact assessment methodology as well as results of impact screening and detailed qualitative and quantitative impact assessment. One of the primary intentions of every EIA study is to identify the associated and potential impacts of the proposed project and proffer measures to mitigate such impacts. The potential and associated impacts that would arise from the proposed project are identified and evaluated.

During construction for instance, most sites are particularly vulnerable to environmental disturbance. Construction is often a rapid and disorderly process, with strong emphasis on completing the project and not on protecting the environment (World Bank, 1991). This creates some impacts on the environment, which may be positive or negative. Some of the environmental changes, whether positive or negative would in some cases be irreversible. For instance, vegetation would be removed, exposing the soil to erosion and other disturbances, which in most case get exacerbated by excavation and grading. The assessment covers all aspects of the project from preconstruction, through construction and operations as well as decommissioning of the project. A key to successful Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is the use of appropriate impact identification and prediction methods. Generally, a number of impact assessment methods have been developed over the years and new approaches continue to emerge. All good methods have certain elements in common, which are widely accepted as essential to ElAs. Any good and widely acceptable impact assessment method (or technique) should address, at least, the following:

**Comprehensiveness**

The premise of a sound impact assessment is to ensure that any and all impact(s), no matter how remote their chances of occurring, are comprehensively assessed and discussed. Thus, a sound impact assessment method must, as a minimum, be capable of detecting the full range of important elements and combinations of elements. It must be innovative in considering possibilities, focusing not only on established possibilities typically associated with planned activities, but also directing attention to novel or unsuspected effects or impacts.

**Selectiveness**

In spite of the need for comprehensiveness, impact assessment documents can become unnecessarily bulky if undue attention is paid to and undeserved effort dissipated on trivialities. Thus, while not completely discountenancing negligible and/or insignificant issues, a good impact assessment method must be able to focus attention on major factors. In this regard, such a method must be designed to be able to eliminate, as early as possible, un-important impacts, by providing a basis for determining the potential significance of an impact, even at the early stages of assessment.

**Exclusiveness**

It is very easy to double-count, or duplicates impacts, For instance, loss of vegetation would necessarily imply loss of wildlife habitat. Thus, while this may not necessarily mean destruction of wildlife (since they can migrate), double-counting could occur, if loss of vegetation is regarded as a separate impact from destruction of wildlife habitat. To this end therefore, a sound assessment method must make concerted efforts to avoid such occurrences, even though expedience has shown that this is difficult because of the many interrelationships that exist in a natural environment.

**Confidence**

The level of confidence about the possibility of an impact occurring or not occurring is important in the overall rating of the significance of an impact. Therefore, in assessment, a sound method must have provision for indicating confidence levels for each impact predicted. Therefore, adequate information must be provided on assumptions made, so that they are open to critical examination, and if necessary, alterations to suit realities on ground.

**Objectiveness**

A sound assessment method must exclude bias, as much as possible. For instance, a Muslim would regard the removal of wild pig species from an environment as a positive impact, based on religious consideration. However, this may not necessarily be true from an ecological viewpoint. Therefore, provisions must be made in any method, to remove subjectivity, by including objectiveness. Several agencies, including the Lagos State Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources and the Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv) have emphasized this. Objectivity minimizes the possibility that the predictions automatically support the preconceived notions of the promoter and/or assessor. These prejudgments are usually caused by a lack of knowledge of local conditions or insensitivity to public opinion.

A second reason for objectivity is to ensure comparability of EIA predictions amongst similar types of actions. Several methods are generally used for impact prediction and analyses. Some of the more popular and internationally accepted options include the following:
*   Checklists
*   Matrices
*   Flowcharts and Networks
*   Mathematical/Statistical models
*   Overlays using maps and GIS

It is very obvious that no single method can have all of the attributes described above, thus, in order to optimize on impact assessment, different groups have over the years evolved methods that have the positive aspects of some or all of the options listed above. For this proposed project, a method was evolved that incorporated all of the foregoing. The methodology is summarized in Figure 5.1, while a description of the process and the results obtained from applying the method is described in the following sub-sections.

**Figure 5.1: Methodological Process for Impact Assessment**

| Step | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| Step 1 | Identification of Project Activities |
| Step 2 | Preliminary identification of potential impacts on biophysical, social and health components of the environment. |
| Step 3 | Screening of Impacts |
| Step 4 | Detailed assessment of selected focus impacts under the following bases: Nature: Positive or Negative; direct or indirect, Magnitude: Qualitative and Quantitative, Extent: Qualitative and Quantitative, Timing and Duration: Temporary, permanent, short-term, long-term, Reversibility: Reversible or irreversible, Likelihood (risk or probability) of occurrence |
| Step 5 | Identification of Mitigation Measures |

**5.2 Preliminary Identification and Screening of Environmental Impacts**

In line with widely recommended impact assessment, approaches (FMEnv. 1995; UNEP, 1996; Canter, 1996; DPR 2002, Lohani et al., 1997) the first level of impact assessment involves the preliminary identification and screening of potential environmental impacts from anticipated activity-environment interactions based on an understanding of the activities and the nature of interaction with environmental components. A modified Leopold matrix (Leopold, 1971) is then used for the identification and screening, The matrix arrays project activities against environmental (biophysical, socio-economic and health) components, and supports a methodical, comprehensive, and objective identification of the impacts each project activity may have on each biophysical, socioeconomic and health component.

Impact identification is based on Wathern (1988), who defines an impact as "having both spatial and temporal components and can be described as the change in an environmental parameter over a specified period within a defined area, resulting from a particular activity compared with the situation which would have occurred had the activity not been initiated". To further guide the identification and screening of impacts using the matrix, established environmental impact indicators or indices are developed, for each of the environmental interaction categories. Impact indicators are the observable or measurable parameters of each environmental component that can be directly or indirectly linked to changes in environmental conditions. Table 5.1 gives the project phases and the summary of related activities. Table 5.2 gives the specific environmental components and sub-elements to be used as indicators while Table 5.3 presents a description of the indicators.

**Table 5.1 Project Phases and Associated Activities**

| PHASES | ACTIVITIES |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Pre-Construction** | Mobilization of equipment and men to site |
| | Site Clearing activities |
| **Construction Phase** | Mobilization of the equipment/ machineries, materials and men for construction activities; |
| | Construction of Camp and Ancillary Facilities |
| | Full Site clearing activities |
| | Actual construction of the building and ancillary building |
| | Wastes and Emission generation and handling |
| **Post Construction (Operation)** | Maintenance of the Structure and other facilities |
| | Waste Management |
| | Water and Waste water treatment |
| **Decommissioning/Abandonment Phase**| Demolition of Structures |
| | Removal of fittings and other facilities |
| | Management of Demolition Wastes |

**Table 5.2: Activity-Environment Interaction Categories and Environmental Components**

| Environment | Environmental and Health Components |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Biophysical** | Vegetation |
| | Groundwater |
| | Air Quality and noise levels |
| | Vegetation and wildlife |
| **Socio-economic/Human** | Population Characteristics |
| | Livelihoods |
| | Socio-cultural institutions |
| | Community Infrastructure/health |
| | Conflicts |

**Table 5.3: Environmental Components and their Impact Indicators**

| Environmental Components | Impact Indicators |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Biophysical** | |
| Climate | Temperature, Rainfall, Relative Humidity, Windspeed and direction. |
| Vegetation | Changes in vegetation abundance and species composition as well as biomass productivity |
| Groundwater Quality | Changes to basic water quality indices such as pH, conductivity, heavy metals and total hydrocarbons |
| Air Quality and noise levels | Changes in background values of basic air quality indices such as TSP, hydrocarbons, NOx, SOx, Co, etc. Increase in background ambient noise levels |
| Wildlife | Changes to species composition and abundance |
| **Socio Economics** | |
| Population Characteristics | Changes in population indices - Total population, gender ratio, age distribution |
| Livelihoods | Improvement or pressure on existing urban/rural infrastructure including waste handling facilities |
| Transport Infrastructure/Health | Impact on traffic congestion road structure and health problems among neighbouring communities/residences. |
| Conflicts | Communal strife between project workers and neighbouring communities |

The modified Leopold impact matrix consists of a horizontal list of biophysical, socioeconomic and health environmental components that could be affected by the proposed project activities versus a vertical list of project activities, which represent environmental aspects, or "sources of impact," associated with each project phase. Environmental aspects are elements of an activity that can or will interact with the biophysical, socio economic and health conditions within the area of influence. Entries in the matrix cells represent the nature and preliminary ranking of the severity of the impact. Ranking of the severity is based on the following scale and symbols:
*   Major - (2)
*   Minor - (1)
*   Negligible and/or no effect - (-) (i.e., a dash).
*   Positive (+)

For this preliminary impact assessment stage, the impacts are defined as:
*   **A Major impact** is one that would affect a large (higher than 40%) amount of a resource and or have a relatively large footprint and persist for a long time or is irreversible.
*   **A Minor impact** is one that could either affect a large (as defined above) or moderate (less than 40%) amount of an affected resource, has a mid to long-term effect but is most likely reversible.
*   **A Negligible impact** is one that may occur but based on experience, available scientific information and expert knowledge will have no measurable effect on the environmental component.
*   **A Positive impact** is one that adds a measurable benefit to the environment

All number entries denote negative impacts. Cells with Positive sign (+) and numbers) indicate a positive and negative impact for the specific activity- environment interaction. All potential impacts, whether likely or unlikely, are also considered at this stage. The 'likelihood of an impact is further assessed in the detailed impact evaluation. Identification and screening of impacts relied on the following:
*   Documented impacts of similar projects in similar environments
*   Consultation with experts
*   Professional judgment.
*   Results of earlier environmental studies carried out in the area
*   Spatial boundaries of interaction were decided based on specialist knowledge and documented experience of the specific activity-environment interaction.

**5.3 Detailed Assessment of Impacts (STEP 4)**

The preliminary identification and screening of environmental impacts resulted in a group of focus impacts (those with impact rankings of 1 and 2), which were further assessed in terms of severity and significance. Impact severity and significance criteria used at the next stage relied on a number of resources and tools including the following:
*   Department of Petroleum Resources (DPR) and Federal Ministry of Environment, (FMEnv) EIA Guidelines
*   Overlaying project components on maps of existing conditions to identify potential impact areas and issues
*   Environmental Baseline Studies conducted specifically for this project
*   Consultation with Nigerian experts and residents
*   Results of earlier studies carried out on the project.
*   Experience from similar projects in Nigeria and worldwide
*   Published and unpublished documents (such as The World Bank Environmental Assessment Sourcebook and other authoritative texts on performing environmental impact assessments) providing guidance on performing impact analysis for industrial development activities
*   UNEP EIA Training Resources Manual (1996).
*   European Commission Guidance on EIA EIS Review (European Commission, 2001)

The approach applied to this proposed Steel Pipe Production project EIA also incorporates the following key elements:

**Impact Severity Evaluation**

A number of criteria are used to assess the severity of the environmental (biophysical, socio economic and health) impacts that were not screened out in the earlier steps. The severity criteria set forth in this section are widely applicable to all types of impacts identified, including impacts that can be expected from the project and impacts resulting from emergencies. Several types of potential consequences (or impacts) were considered for all project stages where applicable:
1.  Natural (physical, chemical and biological) environment
2.  Socio-economic environment
3.  Health and Safety of the public or workers

The detailed assessment of impacts also involved evaluating the potential effects of project activities on the same impact indicators earlier defined but at a greater detail, Impacts were assessed as to whether they are positive (beneficial) or negative (detrimental). Five impact severity evaluation criteria were applied to this study; Magnitude, Duration, Frequency, Areal Extent, and Sensitivity of the Receptor, Within these five criteria, impacts were also evaluated with respect to whether they will result in cumulative effects, incremental changes, or indirect (secondary) effects. The overall impact evaluation considers not only the potential severity of the impact but also the likelihood of its occurrence.

**Magnitude** is defined as the quantitative intensity of the impact, and can be measured as the percentage of a resource or a population within the area of influence, that may be affected by an impact. The definitions of "high," "medium" and "low" with respect to Magnitude may vary depending upon the specific receptor. The Magnitude of an impact may be characterized as follows:
*   **High** - large amount of the resource or population is affected; an easily observable and measurable effect
*   **Medium** - moderate amount of the resource or population is affected; generally measurable and observable effect
*   **Low** - small amount of the resource or population is affected; a low magnitude impact may be within the range of normal variation of background conditions
*   **Negligible** - the amount of resource or population affected is unnoticeable or immeasurably small

Magnitude may also be defined with respect to quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria, if available and applicable, (e.g., level of noise impact in units of decibels). The Magnitude of an impact may be characterized as follows:
*   **High** - greater than the quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria
*   **Medium** - at the quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria
*   **Low** - less than the quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria
*   **Negligible** - impact not detected or at background conditions

**Duration** is defined as the time that is estimated for a population or resource to return to conditions present prior to the impact. The duration is calculated from the time the impact begins or which may coincide with the start of the activity that causes the impact. The Duration of an impact may be characterized as follows:
*   **High** -long-term impact (recovery would not occur within ten years)
*   **Medium** -moderate-term impact (recovery time between one year and ten years)
*   **Low** -short-term impact (recovery time within less than one year)
*   **Negligible** - impact or recovery is very short term or immediate

Characterization of the Duration of an impact as low, medium, or high includes consideration of the Degree of Reversibility of the impact. Impacts for which the Duration is classified as high, as defined above, would be irreversible impacts.

**Frequency** is defined as the number of times an impact is expected to occur over the life of the project. The Frequency of an impact may be characterized as follows:
*   **High** - continuous impact; Impact will occur continuously throughout the life of the project (e.g., continuous process wastewater discharge)
*   **Medium** - intermittent impact: Impact will occur intermittently over the life of the project (e.g., dredging for sand, selling the dredged sand, etc.)
*   **Low** - rarely occurring impact: Impact will occur a very limited number of times (e.g., construction impacts)

There is no "negligible" category for frequency because impacts with no frequency would not occur, and were screened out.

**Areal Extent** refers to the potential areal extent of an impact, and may be quantified in units of area affected (e.g., square kilometres). The Areal Extent of an impact may be characterized as follows:
*   **High** - impact to the national, regional, or global environment (e.g., greenhouse gas emissions)
*   **Medium** - impact to the general vicinity of the project site or study area
*   **Low** - impact limited to the immediate vicinity of the activity or occurrence that results in the impact
*   **Negligible** - impact limited to a very small part of the activity area

**Sensitivity of the Receptor** refers to economic, social, and/or environmental/ecological importance of the receptor, including the receptors' intrinsic sensitivity, reliance on the receptor by people for sustenance, livelihood, or economic activity, and to the importance of direct impacts to persons associated with the resource. Impacts that directly affect people or vital natural resources are deemed to be more important than impacts that indirectly affect people or vital resources. The Sensitivity of the Receptor criterion also refers to potential impacts to Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) and impacts to species, including loss of endangered species, effects of introduction of invasive species, and similar environmental/ecological impacts. The intrinsic sensitivities of a receptor species and actions that alter the function of the receptor are also considered. Sensitivity of the Receptor may be characterized as follows:
*   **High** - receptor is of high economic, social, and/or environmental importance and or has an intrinsic sensitivity (including vulnerability and exposure) to the specific impact (e.g., fresh water resources and mangroves).
*   **Medium** - receptor is of moderate economic, social, and/or environmental importance and is not particularly vulnerable and/or exposed to the impact.
*   **Low** - receptor is of low economic, social, and/or environmental importance and is not vulnerable and/or exposed to the specific impact.
*   **Negligible** - receptor is not of economic, social, and/or environmental importance or is not sensitive to impact.

These significance criteria are applied to each of the potential impacts initially identified during the screening process to determine whether they would likely be negligible, minor, moderate, or major. The impact assessment at this stage takes into consideration design mitigation measures. Those issues determined to be inconsequential or not applicable after consideration of the design mitigation measures are eliminated from or "screened out" from further consideration.

To reach an overall impact severity rating for each impact assessed, the five impacts severity criteria mentioned above are further aggregated using impact severity matrices. Aggregation is at three levels. First, Impact Magnitude and Areal Extent are combined to arrive at a rating for the Impact Quantum (Impact Quantum is a function of the magnitude and areal extent as earlier defined), while Duration and Frequency are aggregated to give the overall Temporal Effects. Impact Quantum and Temporal Effects are then combined and their resulting aggregate assessed in terms of sensitivity to arrive at the overall impact severity. Figures 5-2 to 5-5 show the aggregation process.

A qualitative and where possible, quantitative discussion of the potential for cumulative effects is then used to further qualify the impact based on knowledge of other attendant or anticipated stress factors.

**Figure 5.2: Impact Severity Matrix for Impact Quantum**
```
IMPACT QUANTUM

Areal Extent
Magnitude      Negligible   Low      Medium   High
High           Medium     Medium   High     High
Medium         Low        Medium   Medium   High
Low            Negligible Low      Medium   Medium
Negligible     Negligible Negligible Low      Low
```

**Figure 5.3: Impact Severity Matrix for Temporal Effect**
```
TEMPORAL EFFECTS

Duration
Frequency      Negligible   Low      Medium   High
High           Medium     Medium   High     High
Medium         Low        Medium   Medium   High
Low            Negligible Low      Medium   Medium
Negligible     Negligible Negligible Low      Low
```

**Figure 5.4: Impact Severity Matrix for Quantum and Temporal Effects**
```
IMPACT QUANTUM AND TEMPORAL EFFECTS

IMPACT QUANTUM
Temporal Effects High       Medium   Low      Negligible
High           Major      Major    Moderate Minor
Medium         Major      Moderate Moderate Minor
Low            Moderate   Minor    Minor    Negligible
Negligible     Minor      Minor    Negligible Negligible
```

**Figure 5.5: Overall Impact Severity Rating Matrix**
```
OVERALL IMPACT SEVERITY RATING

SENSITIVITY OF RECEPTOR
IMPACT QUANTUM AND TEMPORAL EFFECTS High       Medium   Low      Negligible
Major          Major      Major    Moderate Minor
Moderate       Major      Moderate Moderate Minor
Minor          Moderate   Minor    Minor    Negligible
Negligible     Minor      Minor    Negligible Negligible
```

**Impact Likelihood Evaluation (STEP 5)**

To further assess the significance of the severity associated with each potential negative impact identified in the previous section, likelihood criteria are applied to each negative impact (Table 5.4). The likelihood criteria are used to determine whether negative impacts can be prevented, mitigated, or is unavoidable. It should be noted that the likelihood criteria is applied to the likelihood of the impact occurring and not the activity occurring, for example, the sinking of the dredge vessel. The overall severity rating (significance) of a negative environmental impact is a function of its severity as earlier defined and the likelihood of occurrence as defined in Table 5-4. For example, a moderate impact that has a high likelihood of occurrence would be more severe than a major impact with a very low likelihood of occurrence. Assigning a significance ranking and a likelihood ranking to each impact allows for semi-quantitative evaluation of the severity of the impact.

**Table 5.4: Impact Likelihood Criteria**

| Likelihood Level | Definition |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Very Low** | Impact has approximately less than 1 or 2 percent likelihood of occurring; impact unknown to have previously resulted in similar circumstances in the industry. |
| **Low** | Impact highly unlikely, given the controls in place (e.g., between approximately 2 to 20 percent likelihood of occurring, impact has been known to result, but only very rarely, in similar circumstances). |
| **Medium** | Impact could occur infrequently during normal operations, but given a breakdown of the safeguards and controls (i.e. lack of maintenance for a protecting device) it could occur more readily (e.g., between approximately 20 to 70 percent likelihood of occurring, impact has been known to result in many similar circumstances, but does not result routinely) |
| **High** | Given the controls in place, the impact is likely to occur during normal operations (e.g., over 70 percent likelihood of occurring, impact has been known to result routinely, though not necessarily in all similar circumstances). |

**Table 5.5: Summary of Impact Severity**

| | Magnitude | Duration | Frequency | Areal Extent | Sensitivity of Receptor |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **High** | Large amount of resource or population affected; easily measurable OR > than the quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria | Long-term impact (recovery would not occur within ten years) | Continuous impact: impact will occur continuously throughout the life of the project (e.g., continuous process emissions from power generating sets and vehicles) | Impact to the national, regional, or global environment (e.g., greenhouse gas emissions) | Receptor is of high economic, social, and/or environmental importance. Has very high intrinsic sensitivity, e.g., sensitivity of juveniles to spills. |
| **Moderate**| Moderate amount of resource or population affected; generally measurable, observable OR At the quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria | Moderate-term impact (recovery time between one year and ten years) | Intermittent impact: impact will occur intermittently over the life of the project (e.g., noise emissions from vehicles). | Impact to the general vicinity of the project site or study area | Receptor is of moderate economic, social, and/or environmental importance; has a moderate intrinsic sensitivity. |
| **Minor** | Small amount of resource or population affected; low magnitude impact may be within range of normal OR Less than the quantitative or semi-quantitative criteria | Short-term impact (recovery time within one year) | Rarely occurring impact: Impact will occur a very limited number of times (e.g., construction impacts) | Impact limited to the immediate vicinity of the activity or occurrence that results in the impact | Receptor is of low economic, social, and/or environmental importance; has low intrinsic sensitivity. |
| **Negligible**| Amount of resource or population affected is unnoticeable or immeasurably small OR Impact not detected or at background conditions | Impact or recovery is very short term or immediate | Never occurring impact: occurrence of impact is almost impossible | Impact limited to a very small part of the activity area | Receptor is not of economic, social, and/or environmental importance or is not sensitive to impact |

The colour coded impact severity matrix presented in Figure 5.6 illustrates the application of the impact severity and likelihood. The likelihood ranking is placed in the y-axis and the impact significance ranking in the x-axis. The colour codes are also used in the text discussing each impact assessed using this method.

**Figure 5.6: Impact Significance Matrix**
```
Likelihood
High           Yellow         Red            Red            Red
Medium         Green          Yellow         Red            Red
Low            Green          Green          Yellow         Yellow
Very Low       Green          Green          Green          Yellow
               Beneficial     Low Significance Moderate Significance High Significance
Impact Severity
```

The overall impact significance level is indicated by the position on the impact significance matrix. For example, impacts placed within the red boxes have a high likelihood of occurrence and serious consequence; thus they have a high significance rating. These high-significance impacts become high priority issues for further evaluation or management action. Similarly, impacts in the yellow category are moderate impacts, with a medium priority. Impacts in the green boxes are low and are given lowest priority, Impacts identified by the white boxes indicate positive or beneficial impacts. The criteria and severity matrix set forth in this section is widely applicable to all the types of events and impacts identified.

**Table 5.6: Potential Impact Identification, Qualification and Rating**

| Project Phase | Project Activity | Description of impact | Impact Qualification | Overall Rating High/Moderate/Low |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| | | | Beneficial | Negative | Short term | Long time | Reversible | Irreversible | |
| **Pre-construction (Mobilization)** | Movement of Equipment etc. | **Biophysical** | | | | | | | |
| | | Increase in noise nuisance | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Reduction in air quality | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | **Socio-Economic** | | | | | | | |
| | | More pressure on existing infrastructures e.g. roads | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Employment | + | | | | | | |
| | | **Health And Safety** | | | | | | | |
| | | Increase in risk of accident/injury due to increase in road traffic | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Increase in respiratory disease | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Movement of heavy equipment to worksite which may pose danger to public | | - | S | | R | | L |
| **Construction** | - Land Clearance - Foundation Pilling - Excavation - Compaction - Fuel consumption - Waste generation - Transportation | **Biophysical** | | | | | | | |
| | | Reduction in biodiversity/Loss of Flora and fauna | | - | | | | I | H |
| | | Alteration of natural soil profile | | - | | | | I | H |
| | | Soil Degradation and soil/Groundwater contamination | | - | | | R | | M |
| | | Increase in noise nuisance | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Reduction in air quality | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Solid waste generation | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | **Socio Economics** | | | | | | | |
| | | Pressure on existing infrastructure | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Stress on existing security structure | | - | | | R | | L |
| | | Influx of people | | - | | | R | | M |
| | | Job creation/Business opportunity/economic growth | + | | | | | | |
| | | Improvement of existing infrastructure | + | | | | | | |
| | | Skills acquisition | + | | | | | | |
| | | Increase in social vices | | - | | | R | | L |
| | | **Health & Safety** | | | | | | | |
| | | Injury/fatalities in workforce/communities | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Increase in communicable disease (Including STDs) | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Increase in respiratory diseases | | - | | | R | | L |
| | | Increase in road traffic volume and risk of accidents/injury | | - | S | | R | | M |
| **Operation** | Operation and Maintenance | **Biophysical** | | | | | | | |
| | | Increase in noise nuisance | | - | | L | R | | L |
| | | Reduction in air quality | | - | | L | R | | L |
| | | Soil Degradation and soil/ground water contamination | | - | | L | | | L |
| | | Reduction in air quality | | - | | L | R | | L |
| | | Solid waste generation impact on existing waste disposal facility | | - | | L | | | L |
| | | **Socio-Economics** | | | | | | | |
| | | Gradual increase in cost of living in nearby communities | | - | | L | | I | L |
| | | Improvement in the welfare of neighbouring communities | + | | | L | | I | L |
| | | Job creation and Business opportunities/economic enhancement | + | | | L | R | | |
| | | **Health and Safety** | | | | | | | |
| | | Injury/fatalities in workforce/communities | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Increase in respiratory disease | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Increase in road traffic volume, accidents/injury | | - | S | | R | | M |
| **Decommissioning** | Demolition and evacuation | Stress on existing infrastructure | | - | S | | R | | M |
| | | Stress on existing security system | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Noise level and dust generation | | - | S | | R | | L |
| | | Solid waste generation and impact on disposal facility | | - | S | | R | | M |
| | | Loss of job | | - | | L | | I | H |
| | | Change in economic conditions/activities | | - | | L | | I | H |
| | | Land availability for alternative use | + | | | | | | |
| | | Emotional disturbances | | - | | L | R | | H |

**5.4 IMPACT ANALYSIS**

This section of the report analyses the associated and potential impacts of activities of the various phases of the project.

**5.4.1 Potential Positive Impacts of the Proposed Project**

There are some positive impacts likely to arise from the proposed project. The basic and most critical positive impacts include the following:

**Creation of Employment Opportunities:**
The proposed project will provide temporary and some permanent employment opportunities. Direct employment shall be created through the engagement of skilled and unskilled labour during the construction phase of the project thereby empowering people financially and reducing the tendency for engaging in social vices, Some indirect employment opportunities shall be created through supply of construction materials and provision of sundry services. Also, some permanent jobs will be created for facility maintenance, provision security amongst others. The proposed construction and operation of the planned development will create socio-economic interaction within the project area.

**Stimulation of Economic Growth**
The injection of the project cost into the local economy will help in stimulating economic activities around the project corridor. The planned project will surely create employment opportunities and this will lead to other business; opportunities within the project area thereby improving

**Reduction in Crime and Social Vices**
The proposed project through its employment creation potentials will contribute to the reduction in crime and social vices as some of the idle youths that would have hitherto been involved in criminal activities would have been gainfully employed.

**Increase in Revenue to Government**
The construction and operation of the proposed development will result in generation of revenue for government through payment of statutory Levies and Taxes.

**5.4.2 Potential Negative Impacts**

**Mobilization Phase Impacts**

This is the planning phase of the project when there will be movement of goods, personnel (workers) and equipment machineries to the project site. Given the magnitude of the project, large numbers of personnel and materials will need to be mobilized and as such, a number of impacts are expected to result from this activity. Some of these impacts will include:

**Impact on Noise Level**
The movement of equipment, machineries and workers to site will lead to minimal vehicular traffic that will result increase noise within the project area as a result of noise generated from vehicles and machineries. The magnitude of this impact is considered to be low given the fact that the mobilization of equipment and workers will happen within limited period and will be restricted to the route to the project area. In terms of frequency, the impact will occur intermittently during the construction phase. Impact duration is therefore low as it will be short lived each time it occurs. The sensitivity of the resources to noise impacts is considered low and the impact is reversible. The likelihood of the impact occurring is moderate since the movement of equipment, machineries and workers are certain to occur. The overall severity rating of the impact is low. The impact significance is therefore of overall low significance.

**Impact on Ambient Air quality**
The movement of equipment, machineries and workers to site will lead to minimal vehicular traffic that will result in emission from vehicle conveying workers and from machineries being mobilized to site thereby impacting on the ambient air quality. The magnitude of this impact is considered to be low given the fact that the movement will be restricted to the vicinity of the project area. The areal extent of the impact is low when compared to the entire size of the free zone, In terms of frequency, the impact will occur intermittently during the preconstruction activities. Impact duration is therefore low as it will be short lived each time it occurs. The sensitivity of the resources to impact is considered medium and the impact is reversible. The likelihood of the impact occurring is moderate since the movement of equipment, machineries and workers are certain to occur. The overall severity rating of the impact is low. The impact significance is therefore of overall low significance.

**Impact on Traffic**
The mobilization of materials, machineries and workers to site would be done by road and this could result in increase in vehicular traffic along the along Lagos-Badagry Expressway corridor. The magnitude of the impact will be moderate given the fact that the movement shall be planned for off-peak periods to reduce the possibility of causing traffic jams. The areal extent of the impact is medium considering the fact the movement activities extend outside the project environment. This impact would be short term and with the implementation of an efficient Traffic and Journey Management Plan, the duration of impact will be low as the mobilization to site would only occur for few days. The likelihood of the impact occurring is moderate since the movement of equipment, machineries and workers are certain to occur. The overall severity rating of the impact is medium as the mobilization will be planned for off-peak period. The impact significance is therefore of overall moderate significance.

**Impact on Existing infrastructure**
The movement of materials and personnel to the project site by road will no doubt put additional pressure on the existing road infrastructure. The magnitude of the impact will be low given the fact that the movement shall be planned for off-peak periods to reduce the possibility of causing stress on other road users. The areal extent of the impact is medium considering the fact the movement activities extend outside the project environment. This impact would be short term and with the implementation of an efficient Traffic and Journey Management Plan, the duration of impact will be low as the mobilization to site would only occur for few days. The likelihood of the impact occurring is moderate since the movement of equipment, machineries and workers are certain to occur. The overall severity rating of the impact is low since the mobilization will be planned for off-peak period and would be short-term. The impact significance is therefore of overall low significance.

**Impact on Public Health and Safety**
The movement of heavy trucks and equipment/ machineries could increase the risk of accidents/injuries due to increase in road traffic and exposure to noise increase that could affect the public health and safety. The possibility of occurrence is low as all project drivers would be made to pass through safe driving training before commencement of project.The likelihood of the impact occurring is moderate since the movement of equipment, machineries and workers are certain to occur. The overall severity rating of the impact is low since the mobilization will be planned for off-peak period and would be short-term. The impact significance is therefore of overall low significance.

**Site Preparation Phase Impacts**

**Impacts on Air Quality (Impairment of Air Quality)**
Air-borne particulates would result from disturbances to the soil during construction and site preparation activities. A lot of dust would be generated during pilling. All diesel-powered facilities such as electricity generators and heavy duty equipment as well as vehicles would emit SO2, CO2, N0X and other gases. Degradation of air quality could occur due to emissions from vehicles. The emissions are short-termed and expected to be localized within the immediate project environment. Though the likelihood of occurrence is high, the consequence is rated a negligible negative. Thus, the overall impact risk level is expected to be minor. The duration of the impact will be moderate as construction will be a short while. The frequency of the impact will be moderate, as the impact will occur intermittently throughout the construction period.

**Impact on Noise Level**
During site preparation a lot of noise will be generated particularly during foundations pilling works, iron cutting and welding works as well as vehicular movement. Noise levels arising from these activities though expected to exceed ambient levels at times will be transient and localized. Given the fact that noise levels are not expected to significantly exceed the existing background, the sensitivity of the receptor is classified minor and overall risk level is expected to be low, since impact is expected to be temporary.

**Impacts on Soil**
The potential impacts on soil resources are closely related to site clearing, site preparation and construction of site camp. These could manifest mostly as soil erosion, land degradation and fugitive dust released into atmosphere. Other significant potential effects on the soil include compaction, changes in drainage patterns and contamination from discharges, leakages and accidental releases. It is also expected that grading and compaction of soil would lead to loss of organic matter, alteration of soil structure and reduction in filtration, water holding capacity, aeration and root penetration. Alteration to soil conditions can cause widespread secondary impacts by reducing the capacity of the habitat to support flora and fauna. Also, sand filling of the site with soil materials from other sources could result in the transfer of soil contaminants from point of purchase to the project site

**Impacts on Groundwater**
Site Preparation is not expected to disturb the flow of groundwater in the area, as only the topmost layer of the earth materials would be involved during site preparation. The only possibility of impact on the groundwater is expected to occur in the remote case of percolation of materials, oils and grease and wastes if not properly stored. This possibility is remote considering the site management plan that will be put in place. Therefore, the impact is considered negligible negative with low likelihood. The overall risk rating is low.

*   **Loss of Biodiversity**
    Site preparation activities will involve the clearing of the vegetation on the project site and sand filling. These activities will without any doubts lead to loss of flora and fauna that are native to the project area. Site preparation will obviously result in massive loss of biodiversity within the project area. The likelihood of impact occurrence is high and impact significance is also high as loss of biodiversity is irreversible and permanent

*   **Loss of Natural Habitats**
    The site preparation activities at the project site will result in the loss of natural habitat for some fauna and flora that are native to the project environment. The implication of this is that some of the native fauna will migrate to other safer environment while some endangered species may go into extinction from the area. The migration of some species from the project area to other areas may result in species competing for habitats. This impact is irreversible and permanent. The likelihood of occurrence is high and impact significance is rated high

**Impacts on Traffic and Transportation**
In the course of site preparation activities, there will be need to transport materials and men to the project site at various times. The increased presence of trucks associated with the site preparation activities may further worsen the sometime difficult traffic situation in the area

**Impacts on Waste Management**
A lot of wastes are expected to be generated during the site preparation phase of this project. These would include wood cuttings from cleared vegetation, pet bottles, packaging material, tins, welding electrodes, etc. Human wastes generated from the construction workers could constitute aesthetic issues for the project area. Wastes if allowed to accumulate could lead to contamination of soil and groundwater as well as the existing water body, particularly if percolation and run off into the waters is allowed. All wastes arising from construction activities will be evacuated from the site for proper disposal by the Lagos State Waste Management Authority (LAWMA) or its appointed contractor

**Impacts on Public Health and Safety**
The site preparation phase of the project would definitely bring about the movement of different people including skilled and unskilled labour force and service providers. This has its own attendant health and safety implications. The health and safety problems that could be associated with the project could be classified as:
(a) **Communicable diseases** - Skin infections, sexually transmitted diseases, dysentery, respiratory tract infections etc
(b) **Non-communicable diseases** - include those as a result of inhalation of fumes from vehicles, machineries which could result in health problems. Allergic reaction may also arise from the fumes.
(c) **Injuries** - There may be injury and even accident

**Construction Phase Impacts**

This section of the report analyses the associated and potential impacts of construction activities related to the project.

*   **Impacts on Air Quality**
    Air-borne particulates would result from disturbances to the soil during construction activities of the proposed project. For instance, a lot of dust would be generated during pilling. All diesel-powered facilities such as electricity generators and heavy-duty equipment as well as vehicles would emit SO2, CO2, N0X and other gases. Degradation of air quality could occur due to emissions from vehicles. The emissions are short-termed and localized within the immediate project environment. Though the likelihood of occurrence is high, the consequence is rated a negligible negative. Thus, the overall impact risk level is expected to be minor. The duration of the impact will be moderate as construction activities are expected to continue for not less than six (6) months. The frequency of the impact will be moderate, as the impact will occur intermittently throughout the construction period.

*   **Impact on Noise Level**
    During construction, a lot of noise will be generated particularly during foundations, pilling, iron cutting and welding works as well as vehicular movement. Noise levels arising from these activities though expected to exceed ambient levels at times will be transient and localized. Given the fact that noise levels are not expected to significantly exceed the existing background and the fact that the area is already quite used to high levels of noise from vehicular movements, the sensitivity of the receptor is classified minor and overall risk level is expected to be low, since impact is expected to be temporary.

*   **Impacts on Geology (Alteration to Site Geology)**
    The study area lies in a very geological (both tectonic and seismic) stable region with no recorded cases of earthquakes or tremors. In addition, no major or minor geological hazards are known to occur in the area. Only minimal geological impacts are expected in the construction phase of the project which is related basically to the exaction of top soil for construction works. No topographic or geologic alteration due to the construction of the proposed development is expected. Though the site requires sand filling, the sand filling activities are not expected to cause any form of geological alterations Soil erosion is not anticipated as the adequate control measures will be put in place. Impact consequence from construction activities is rated a negligible negative, while the likelihood of its occurrence is low, thus the overall risk is low.

*   **Impacts on Soil**
    The potential impacts on soil resources are closely related to site clearing, site preparation and construction. These could manifest mostly as soil erosion, land degradation and fugitive dust released into atmosphere. Other significant potential effects on the soil include compaction, changes in drainage patterns and contamination from discharges, leakages and accidental releases. It is also expected that grading and compaction of soil would lead to loss of organic matter, alteration of soil structure and reduction in filtration, water holding capacity, aeration and root penetration. Alteration to soil conditions can cause widespread secondary impacts by reducing the capacity of the habitat to support flora and fauna. The impact level is negatively moderate as its consequences are localized within the project area. The likelihood of occurrence is high however; in view of the temporary nature of the construction work, overall impact risk is considered low.

*   **Impacts on Groundwater**
    There is potentials for percolation of materials such as oils, used lubricants and wastes if not properly stored. This possibility is remote considering the site management plan that will be put in place. Therefore, the impact is considered negligible negative with low likelihood. The overall risk rating is low.

*   **Impacts on Waste Management**
    A lot of wastes would be generated during the construction phase of the project. These would include metal cuttings, packaging material, anti-corrosion chemicals and paints, empty drums and tins, welding electrodes, etc. Human wastes generated from the construction workers could constitute aesthetic issues for the project area. Wastes if allowed to accumulate could lead to contamination of soil and groundwater, particularly if percolation and run off into the waters is allowed. All wastes arising from construction activities will be evacuated from the site, for proper disposal by the Lagos State Waste Management Authority (LAWMA) or its appointed contractor.

**Construction Phase Impacts (Socio Economics)**

In addition to the environmental impacts described above, the construction of this proposed project would impact on the local socio-economic framework in a number of ways.

**Impacts on Land-Use and Availability**
The proposed project site is zoned residential and there already exist within the area residential developments. The sitting of the proposed project in the area would only enhance the compatibility of the land use with the existing land uses in the area. However, once the proposed project is constructed on the site, the option for converting the site to other land uses would be highly limited. Also, the proposed project site will also no longer be available for use.

**Impacts on Traffic and Transportation**
In the course of constructing the proposed Structure, there will be need to transport materials and men to the project site at various times. In addition other project components such as foundation equipment will also be transported to site. The increased presence of heavy-duty trucks associated with the construction activities may further worsen the already difficult traffic situation in the area and could increase the potentials for accidents. This could lead to physiological stress on the people in the area.

**Impacts on Public Health and Safety**
The construction phase of the project would definitely bring about the movement of different people including skilled and unskilled labour force and service providers. This has its own attendant health and safety problems. The health and safety problems that could be associated with the project could be classified as:
(a) **Communicable diseases** - Skin infections, sexually transmitted diseases, dysentery, respiratory tract infections etc.
(b) **Non-communicable diseases** - include those as a result of inhalation of fumes from vehicles, machineries that could result in health problems. Allergic reaction may also arise from the fumes.
The increased presence of heavy-duty trucks associated with the construction activities may create difficult traffic situation in the area and could increase the potentials for accidents. Since the project site is located along a major highway, there is the potentials for workers or visitors to the site to be hit by vehicles plying the highway

**Impact on Historical and Cultural Resources**
No cultural heritage resources were found within and around the project site, There will be no impacts to cultural resources on archaeological materials as none was found within the project area

**Operation/ Maintenance Phase Impacts**

*   **Impacts on Air Quality and Climate**
    During operation, direct and negative impacts could result from generating sets, vehicles travelling to and from the project site. In this regard, the impact of operations of the terminal facility on air quality is rated as minor risk, with a minor negative consequence and low likelihood of occurrence.

*   **Impacts on Noise Level**
    The noise that shall be generated from the operation of the proposed Container Terminal development is not expected to be above the recommended 70 decibels by NESREA for commercial area as there would hardly be any activities that could generate such level of noise. It would be safe therefore to conclude that impacts due to noise levels shall be low with a low likelihood of occurrence and low risk impact.

*   **Impacts on Soil**
    Potential impacts to soil during the operational phase could occur through the improper use, storage and handling of the materials such as petroleum products and solid wastes generated on site. The comprehensive environmental procedures prepared for the project will ensure that any potential impacts are adequately mitigated. Thus impact level is minor negative consequence, with a low likelihood of occurrence and overall risk level adjudged low.

*   **Impacts on Groundwater**
    During operational phase groundwater resources could be negatively impacted through leakage of petroleum product storage facilities on site or accidental spills. The management plan that shall be put in place will make spills and accidental discharges a very rare case. Also the seepage of sewage/ wastewater into the ground could impact negatively on the ground water in the project area. Adequate provision has been made to ensure all liquid wastes either sewage or waste water are well treated before discharge into the environment. Therefore the overall impact rating of the impact is seen as low with low likelihood of occurrence and medium negative impact.

**Impacts on Socio-Economics**

*   **Impacts on Transportation**
    The transportation impacts resulting from the operation of the proposed development will be in terms of increased in vehicular traffic as a result of residents and visitors to the facility. The magnitude of this impact will be moderate. Although the project area is small, the traffic-build up would definitely extend well beyond the immediate environment of the project. The duration and frequency of impact will both be major as the impact will occur continuously throughout the lifetime of the project. The truth is that the project area is already subject to substantial vehicular traffic, the add-on effect on traffic will be minimal, even though the effect on the population cannot be ignored. In this regard the severity of the impact in terms of the sensitivity of the receptor is rated moderate.

*   **Fire Hazards**
    Fires may result either by operational omissions or commission and/or through unanticipated lightening discharges and/ or sometimes from high voltages from electricity distribution company This event if allowed to occur, could lead to loss of lives and property at the project site and the fire may spread to adjourning facilities, causing unquantifiable damage, The proponent already has a standing arrangement with both the state and federal fire services as well as a robust Emergency Response Plan. However, there shall be provision of comprehensive fire prevention and fire- fighting equipment for the structure. In addition, all residents shall be taken through appropriate Emergency Response and Evacuation trainings and drills periodically

*   **Impact on Security Arrangement of the Project Area**
    The existence of the proposed development in the project area could bring about new security challenges as more people and businesses will be attracted to the project area. This may result in increase in crimes and social vices in the area and will obviously impact on the existing security arrangement in the project area and stretch the host community security infrastructure

*   **Impact on Existing Infrastructure/Amenities**
    The existence of the proposed development in the project area could put additional pressure on the existing infrastructure/ utilities in the area such as roads, hospital, schools, shopping malls, recreational facilities, waste management facility amongst others. For instance, the Connection of the facility to the national grid for electricity supply will increase electricity consumption in the project area. Also, there may be movement of more people into the area thus increasing the number of vehicles plying the Lagos-Badagry Expressway, thus putting addition pressure on the road.

**Cumulative Impacts**

Cumulative impact means the impact on the environment which results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable future actions regardless of what agency or person undertakes such other actions. Cumulative impacts can result from individually minor but collectively significant actions taking place over a period of time.

For the proposed development, the cumulative impacts include:
*   **Traffic Congestion**
    The construction and operation phases of the proposed development will without any doubts add on to the existing traffic situation around mowo junction and the immediate environment. This impact is significant and will require coordinated effort of all stakeholders within the corridor

**Residual Impacts**

Residual impacts are changes resulting from the implementation of the proposed project that remain or can be observed even after the implementation of mitigation measures. These impacts exist for as long as the project exists. For the proposed project, the residual impacts are discussed below:
*   **Impact of Landtake**
    The proposed project involves the use of the available land space on the project site. The implication of this is that for as long as the project exist, the land taken for the project will no longer be available for other uses

*   **Change in the Aesthetics and Landscape**
    With the emergence of the proposed development, there will be change in the aesthetics and landscape of the project area. This impact is expected to continue as long as the project exist