### **CHAPTER SIX: MITIGATION MEASURES**

**6.1 Introduction**

Typically, the acceptability and/or suitability of a particular project is premised on several considerations, not the least of which is the reduction of negative environmental and social impacts to tolerable levels. Impact significance reduction is. usually achieved by introducing mitigation/amelioration measures to cater for the negative impacts identified. In this section of the report, we present a summary of those measures that are deemed adequate to achieve this objective as well as the residual impacts that will remain after the implementation of these mitigation measures. For ease of comprehension; the mitigation measures are presented based on the various impacts identified. It should be noted that no mitigation measures are necessary for positive impacts and as such they are not discussed in this section.

**6.2 Mitigation Measures**

Mitigation measures are options that can be used to either completely eliminate or minimize identified negative impacts of a development project. The traditional approach to design and operations is to ensure compliance with the applicable safety codes and standards during design. However, compliance with regulations, codes and standards may not be sufficient to achieve an appropriate level of Health Safety and Environmental (HSE) performance in design. Design codes are generic and applicable to facilities in a number of geographical areas that face a wide range of technical challenges unique to the project. The design of the proposed project is based on the strictest of international codes and best-practices. The HSE objective with respect to the design and building plan is to implement all cost effective measures to reduce the risk and effects from major hazards including accidents. The approach has been to use this as a goal rather than a prescriptive objective that cannot be achieved without following a documented process of identification, assessment, reduction and continuous monitoring. Thus the steps taken in the HSE process for the Project included the following:

*   Design based on Codes, Standards and Regulations.
*   Improved design based on Quantitative Risk Assessment and Environmental Impact Assessment
*   Improved design from human factors evaluation

It should be cleared here that most of the likely impacts due to this project have been considered in the selection of the conceptual design. While additional measures may require outright purchase of abatement equipment, others shall be requiring sound operational procedures and good maintenance. The selection of the proposed site has the potential to assist in avoiding or eliminating many possible impacts that might occur from a project of this nature, especially with reference to its proximity to like uses and being within an high profile commercial zone with less residential activities.

**Site Preparation and Construction Phase**

**Impact on Air quality**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall implement the following;

*   Measures to reduce dust, such as water suppression, shall be used where possible.
*   Regular maintenance and servicing of construction equipment that contribute to air emission shall be implemented.
*   Only modern and well maintained equipment and machinery for construction activities
*   Movements of men and materials shall be properly coordinated to optimize vehicle use and reduction of resultant vehicular emissions.
*   All mobile and stationary internal combustion engines shall be properly maintained and put in good condition before and during project implementation
*   Low emission/high efficiency engines shall be used to reduce emission of noxious gases
*   All project vehicles shall be put off while in traffic jams to avoid continuous release of emission into the environment
*   Appropriate PPEs such including Nose mast shall be provided and the use by workers on site shall be enforced

**Impact on Noise Level**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   All equipment are maintained as per manufacturer's recommendations and operated as per original specifications
*   Activities associated with high levels of noise are limited to daylight hours.
*   Construction equipment with lower sound power levels are selected and used.
*   Project personnel are used appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to reduce exposure to noise impact (e.g. mufflers)
*   Noise attenuation measures such as installation of acoustic mufflers on large engines and equipment are put in place

**Impact on Terrestrial Ecosystem (Loss of Biodiversity and destruction of natural Habitats)**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure

*   Clearing of vegetation is limited to the area required for construction works.
*   Site clearing is carried out in a manner that will allow some of the terrestrial fauna within the project site migrate or escape to other areas
*   Work areas are clearly marked to prevent clearing or disturbance outside areas designated for work or for clearing.
*   Areas that are cleared but not used for the project shall be restored and revegetated. Revegetation procedures shall use native species where possible and control of invasive plants, including removal and replacement of existing invasive plants.

**Impact on Soil and Ground water**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Clearing and removal of vegetation is limited to only those areas required for Project activities.
*   Exposed areas of soil are revegetated as soon as possible.
*   Areas of exposed soil and soil stockpiles are reduced as much as practicable.
*   Excavation works are not be executed under aggressive weather conditions.
*   Disturbed areas are rehabilitated as soon as possible to prevent erosion.
*   Work areas are clearly defined and where necessary demarcated to avoid unnecessary disturbance of areas outside the project footprint
*   Any hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used are stored in properly labelled oil storage tanks (surrounded with bund wall), with hoses and gauges kept within the bund.
*   Waste storage areas are located on hard standing (or in a bund wall, where necessary) to prevent potential contamination of soil and ground water
*   Spill containment equipment to contain incidental spills/leaks, including drip pans to contain any spills during refueling activities are provided
*   Spill control and response plans to respond to spills and leaks are implemented.
*   General wastes that cannot be reused are periodically evacuated by approved waste disposal service provider

**Impact on Surface Water and Hydrobiology**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Proper drainage facilities are provided to prevent flooding. The run off shall be channeled to an oil/water separator and treated to NESREA and LASEPA standards before discharge
*   Excavated portions of the soils in the area are properly compacted to avoid mass movements of loose soil materials into the water course in the areas by all the possible agents of denudation
*   Cleared vegetation/materials are properly taken care of not to be washed into surface water course arbitrarily
*   Proper sewage and waste management facilities are put in place for workers, such as mobile toilets, waste bins so as not to leave the workers to self-help.
*   Any hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used are stored in properly labelled oil storage tanks (surrounded with bund wall), with hoses and gauges kept within the bund.
*   Spill containment equipment to contain incidental spills/leaks, including drip pans to contain any spills during refueling activities are provided
*   Spill control and response plans to respond to spills and leaks are implemented.

**Impact on Waste Management**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure

*   An efficient Waste Management Plan are put in place and implemented
*   Waste generated from the site preparation activities are properly stored to avoid contamination of ground and surface water.
*   Waste generated from site preparation activities are disposed off using approved Waste Disposal Service Provider

**Workmen Safety (Injuries and Fatalities)**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Appropriate Personnel Protective Equipment shall be provided and the used shall be enforced
*   First Aid Box and First Aiders shall be provided on site
*   Medical Facilities such as retainer hospital shall be provided to handle critical medical cases among workmen on site

**Impact on Public Health, Safety and Security**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   The local communities are informed of the project activities prior to commencement of work.
*   Construction contractor are briefed on the socio-cultural norms and sensitivities of the neighboring communities before commencement of work in the area.
*   Construction workers camp are developed and workforce management protocols that include workforce behaviour and interactions with the local communities shall be implemented and enforced.
*   Community based training on the prevention of common communicable diseases, water protection/purification techniques and basic sanitation are organized periodically programme, including a Code of Conduct, for all construction workers (including new comers directly related to the project) shall be carried out prior to construction activities. This will increase sensitivity to local norms and customs and will provide awareness to contractors and employees of appropriate and acceptable behaviours and govern worker interactions with the local communities.
*   A grievance resolution mechanism (which tracks grievances and responses; and respond in a timely manner with corrective actions identified where appropriate) are developed and implemented.
*   Prohibition of unauthorized access to the site are maintained.
*   No employment shall take place at the entrance to the site. Only formal channels for employment are used, and recruitment shall take place only at designated times and locations.
*   An HIV/AIDS policy and information document for all workers directly related to the project are developed and implemented. The information document will address factual health issues as well as behaviour change issues around the transmission and infection of HIV/AIDS. Awareness education about HIV and AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases is created among the workforce
*   Journey Management Plans that take into consideration peak hour travelling times during the day and try to avoid travelling during this time is developed and implemented

**Impact on Traffic and Transportation**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Journey Management Plans that take into consideration peak hour travelling times during the day and try to avoid travelling during this time is implemented
*   Drivers shall adhere to speed limits of less than 40 km/h in the project area.
*   Drivers' competency is assessed and where required training shall be provided.
*   Visible warning signs are put on roads and vehicles associated with the project

**Operational and Maintenance Phase**

The following mitigation measures are proposed to address the impacts identified from the proposed operations at the structure. Air quality-Air quality impact from operation of the project will include fugitive emissions from the tanks used to store petroleum products such as diesel for running generators, combustion exhaust from various vehicles.

To mitigate this impact:

**GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure**

*   Appropriate pollution control device such as filters and scrubbers are installed on diesel generators and pump;
*   The composition of exhaust gases emitted to the atmosphere will be controlled by ensuring that all electricity generators and vehicles to be used shall have high efficiency burner, to reduce emission of noxious gases.

**Geology and Soil**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure;

*   Open surfaces are paved while unpaved surfaces, are greened with grasses and plants.
*   The project Environmental Management Plan is fully implemented.

**Natural hazards**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   The natural hazard associated with flooding from torrential rainfall. The buildings and other associated facilities shall be designed to withstand such natural hazard. The design parameters will protect against high winds, lightening as well as storm surge and wave effects.

**Fire and Explosion**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall

*   Put in place leak detection systems and automated shut down systems
*   A dedicated firefighting system designed in accordance with NFPAIP model code of Practice 19 comprising the underlisted shall be provided
    *   Water Storage with borehole
    *   Complete ring main round the site
    *   Deluge systems for all storage Terminal operation areas with remote
    *   Fire hydrants with monitors located strategically throughout the Terminal
*   Fire Prevention Systems including flame arresting devices, earthing and lightening arrestor shall be put in place
*   Fire Response Plan supported with necessary resources shall be put in place
*   Safety and Fire drills/ trainings in the use of fire-fighting equipment and evacuation shall be put in place
*   A robust Emergency Response Plan that considers the roles of neighboring facilities shall be put in place
*   Fire Alarms and firefighting systems shall be regularly inspected and maintained.
*   Fire and Safety signages shall be pasted at strategic location within the Terminal

**Socioeconomic**

The project is expected to contribute immensely to the socio-economic development of the project area and environs. The project is likely to result in increased earnings for local artisans, etc. GK &A Logistics Limited plans to employ as many locals as possible to work as skilled and unskilled labour during the construction phase of the project

**Waste Management**

**Solid Waste**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Solid wastes are segregated from source and properly containerized
*   Wastes are properly disposed using LAWMA approved Waste disposal company
*   Wastes are properly tracked from the Terminal to the final disposal point
*   A robust Waste Management Plan shall be put in place and implemented

**Sewage and Wastewater Management**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Wastewater Treatment facility with required capacity is incorporated into the project design.
*   Storm water run-off and wastewater from the facility shall be channeled to the treated to LASEPA standards before discharge

**Traffic**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Vehicles belonging to occupants of the facility shall not be allowed to park along the roads around the facility to prevent them creating unnecessary traffic gridlock
*   Adequate Parking Lots shall be provided for trucks and vehicle coming in and out of the facility

**Impact on Existing Infrastructure and Utilities**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall support as much as practicable within her limited resources community development efforts around the proposed project area particularly withy respect to infrastructure and social amenities

**Cultural Resources**

No cultural heritage resources found within and aroud the project site. There will be no significant impacts to cultural resources anticipated from the construction and operation of the proposed project; therefore, no mitigation is planned. In the event of the unanticipated discovery of significant cultural resources, the unanticipated discovery plan included in section 7, Environmental Management Plan, will be implemented.

**Decommissioning Phase**

**Impact on Air quality**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Measures to reduce dust, such as water suppression are used where possible.
*   Only modern and well-maintained equipment and machinery are used for decommissioning activities
*   Movements of men and materials during this phase are properly coordinated to optimize vehicle use and reduction of resultant vehicular emissions.
*   All project vehicles are put off while in traffic jams to avoid continuous release of emission into the environment
*   Appropriate PPEs such including Nose mast shall be provided and the use by workers on site shall be enforced

**Impact on Noise Level**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   All equipment are maintained as per manufacturer's recommendations and operated as per original specifications.
*   Project personnel shall use appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to reduce exposure to noise impact (e.g. mufflers)

**Impact on Waste Management**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   An efficient Waste Management Plan is put in place and implemented
*   Waste generated from the decommissioning activities is properly stored to avoid contamination of ground and surface water.
*   Waste shall be properly disposed using LAWMA accredited PSP waste Collector

**Impact on Public Health, Safety and Security**

GK &A Logistics Limited shall ensure:

*   Strict Compliance with site HSE Requirements by all workers
*   Emergency response procedures are put in place and enforced
*   Use of appropriate PPEs by workers and visitors to site are enforced.
*   Journey management plans that take into consideration peak hour travelling times during the day and try to avoid travelling during this time is developed and implemented

**Table 6.1: Summary of Impacts, Corresponding Mitigation Measures and Residual Impacts**

| Project Activity | Receptor | Summary of Potential Impacts | Potential Impacts Significance (without Mitigation) | Mitigation Measures | Residual Impacts (After implementation of Mitigation Measures) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Pre-construction Phase** | | | | | |
| Movement of workers, Machineries and materials | Ambient Air | Impairment/ deterioration of Air quality by emissions from project vehicles (SPM, NOx, SOx, CO) | Moderate | GK& A Logistics Limited shall ensure: Project vehicles with efficient engine performance and with minimal emissions are selected and used. This can be achieved through regular servicing and maintenance. All materials with potential to result in dust emissions are covered during transportation to site. Onsite vehicle speed on unhardened roads and surfaces is limited to about 15km/h so as to reduce dust generation. | Low |
| | | Increase in Noise levels | Moderate | GK&A Logistics Limited shall ensure: Noise attenuation measures such as installation of acoustic mufflers on large engines and equipment shall be out in place; | Low |
| | Socio-economics | Increase in road accidents as a result of increase in vehicular traffic and movement | Moderate | GK&A Logistics Limited shall ensure: Visible warning signs are placed on roads and vehicles associated with the project. Defensive driving course are organized for project Drivers. Journey Management Plan that will ensure Large and slow moving vehicles are scheduled during off-peak periods shall be implemented. A grievance resolution procedure that will track grievances and responses (for any damage or accidents) and respond in a timely manner with corrective actions identified as appropriate shall be developed and implemented. Community awareness of unusual activity within the project, area is raised. Compulsory medical fitness tests are carried out on project drivers | Low |
| | Road Traffic | Increase in Traffic gridlock around the project area corridor | Moderate | GK&A Logistics Limited shall ensure: Journey management plans that take into consideration peak hour travelling times during the day and try to avoid travelling during this time shall be implemented. Drivers shall adhere to speed limits of less than 40 km/h in the project area. Drivers' competency shall be assessed and where required training shall be provided. Visible warning signs are put on roads and vehicles associated with the project | Low |
| Establishment of laydown area for construction worker’s camp | Soil | Soil contamination resulting from oil spoil and poor waste management leading reduced soil quality | Moderate | GK&A Logistics Limited shall ensure: Removal of soil cover shall be restricted to only those areas necessary for lay down of equipment and construction workers camp. Soil conservation measures shall be implemented such as stockpiling topsoil or gravel for the remediation of disturbed areas. Disturbed areas shall be rehabilitated as soon as possible. Work areas shall be clearly defined and where necessary demarcated to avoid unnecessary disturbance of areas outside the development footprint. Training shall be provided for workers on safe storage and handling practices and rapid spill response and clean-up techniques during induction. Spill containment equipment to contain incidental spills/leaks, including drip pans to contain any spills during refueling activities shall be provided. Spill control and response plans to respond to spills and leaks shall be implemented. Any hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used shall be stored in properly labelled oil storage tanks (surrounded with bund wall), with hoses and gauges kept within the bund. Waste and storage areas for hazardous substances shall be separated on site and waste storage areas shall be located on hard standing (or in a bund wall, where necessary) to prevent potential contamination. | Low |
| | Air Quality | Deterioration of ambient air quality from vehicular emissions (SPM, NOx, CO, SOx); increase in noise levels | Low | GK & A Logistics Limited shall ensure: Measures to reduce dust, such as water suppression are used. Regular maintenance and servicing of construction equipment that contribute to air emission shall be implemented. Only modern and well maintained equipment and machinery for construction activities. Movements of men and materials shall be properly coordinated to optimize vehicle use and reduction of resultant vehicular emissions. All mobile and stationary internal combustion engines shall be properly maintained and put in good condition before and during project implementation. Low emission/high efficiency engines shall be used to reduce emission of noxious gases. All project vehicles shall be put off while in traffic jams to avoid continuous release of emission into the environment. Appropriate PPEs such including Nose mast shall be provided and the use by workers on site shall be enforced. | Negligible |
| | Noise | Increase in Noise Nuisance and Vibration | Low | All equipment shall be maintained and operated as per original specifications. Activities, associated with high levels of noise shall be limited to daylight hours. Construction equipment with lower sound power levels shall be selected and used. Project personnel shall use appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to reduce exposure to noise impact (e.g. mufflers). Noise attenuation measures such as installation of acoustic mufflers on large engines and equipment are put in place. Equipment shall be turned off when not in use. | Negligible |
| **Site Clearing and Preparation** | Biodiversity (Terrestrial flora and fauna) | Loss of terrestrial flora and fauna; Loss of natural habitats | High | Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to the Project site. Work areas shall be clearly marked to prevent clearing or disturbance outside areas designated for work or for clearing. Areas that are cleared that are not used for operations shall be restored and revegetated. Revegetation procedures shall use native species where possible and control of invasive plants, including removal and replacement of existing invasive plants. All relevant employees shall be trained for issues related to protection of environmental protection (vegetation and fauna). No herbicides shall be used on site for vegetation clearing. | Moderate |
| | Soil | Removal of top soil and soil compaction associated with vegetation clearance and site preparation. | Moderate | Clearing of Project site shall be limited to only areas required for Project activities. Exposed areas of soil shall be revegetated as soon as possible. Areas of exposed soil and soil stockpiles shall be reduced as much as practicable. Use of silt traps or similar systems to reduce discharge of silt shall be ensured. | Low |
| | Noise | Increased noise nuisance- noise emission generation through site preparation activities. | Low | Noise attenuation measures such as installation of acoustic mufflers on large engines and equipment shall be put in place; Hearing protection shall be provided for workers and visitors on site. | Negligible |
| | Air Quality | Impairment of Air Quality- through dust emissions from excavation of and site clearing activities leading to high suspended participates in the atmosphere | Low | Site clearing equipment shall be operated and maintained under optimum fuel efficient conditions. Low emission/high efficiency engines shall be used. Cleared site shall be watered regularly to douse emission of dust. | Negligible |
| **Construction and Civil works** | Waste Management | Solid waste Generation-impact on existing disposal facility | Moderate | An efficient Waste Management Plan shall be put in place and implemented. Wastes generated as a result of the project activities shall be properly containerized to avoid contamination of groundwater and nearby surface water. Approved Waste Disposal Service provider shall be contracted to handle waste generated on site. | Negligible |
| | Soil and Ground water | Reduction in structural stability and percolative ability of soil resulting from compaction during excavation activities Soil Contamination | Moderate | Excavation works shall not be executed under aggressive weather conditions. Stockpiles shall be appropriately covered to reduce soil loss as a result of wind or water erosion. Disturbed areas shall be rehabilitated as soon as possible to prevent erosion. Work areas shall be clearly defined and where necessary demarcated to avoid unnecessary disturbance of areas outside the development footprint. Any hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used shall be stored in properly labelled oil storage tanks (surrounded with bund wall), with hoses and gauges kept within the bund. Waste and storage areas for hazardous substances shall be separated on site and waste storage areas shall be located on hard standing (or in a bund wall where necessary) to prevent potential contamination. Spill containment equipment to contain incidental spills/leaks, including drip pans to contain any spills during refueling activities shall be provided. Spill control and response plans to respond to spills and leaks shall be implemented. General wastes that cannot be reused shall be periodically evacuated by a government approved waste contractor. | Low |
| | Air Quality and Noise | Emissions (like SO2, CO, NOx, VOC) from construction equipment such as excavation and levelling equipment, lifting cranes, welding, cutting amongst others. Increase in dust form construction activities. Increase in noise level from construction activities | Moderate | Measures to reduce dust, such as water suppression, shall be used where possible. Regular maintenance and servicing of construction equipment that contribute to air emission shall be implemented. Only modern and well-maintained equipment and machinery for construction activities. All equipment shall be maintained as per manufacturer's recommendations and operated as per original specifications. Activities associated with high levels of noise shall be limited to daylight hours. Construction equipment with lower sound power levels shall be selected and used. Acoustic enclosures shall be installed on equipment casing radiating noise. Project personnel shall be provided with appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and the use enforced to reduce exposure to noise impact. | Low |
| | Public health, safety and security | Disruption of family structure and social networks; increase in level of crime and drug and alcohol abuse, increase in incidence of sex workers and casual sexual relations, which may result in STIs and unwanted pregnancies | Low | Project Communities shall be informed of the project activities prior to commencement of work. Construction contractor shall be briefed on the socio-cultural norms and sensitivities of the neighboring communities before commencement of work in the area. Construction workers camp shall be developed and workforce management protocols that include workforce behaviour and interactions with the local communities shall be implemented and enforced. An induction and sensitization programme, including a Code of Conduct, for all construction workers (including new comers directly related to the project) shall be carried out prior to construction activities. This will increase sensitivity to local norms and customs and will provide awareness to contractors and employees of appropriate and acceptable behaviours and govern worker interactions with the local communities. A grievance mechanism procedure (which tracks grievances and responses; and respond in a timely manner with corrective actions identified where appropriate) shall be developed and implemented. The grievance procedure shall be communicated to the local communities. Key steps of the grievance mechanism include: Establishment of a grievance register to be regularly updated, this should include All responses and response times. No employment shall take place at the entrance to the site. Only formal channels for employment shall be used, and recruitment shall take place only at designated times and locations. An HIV/AIDS policy and information document for all workers directly related to the project shall be developed and implemented. The information document will address factual health issues as well as behaviour change issues around the transmission and infection of HIV/AIDS. Stakeholder engagement plan shall be developed and implemented. | Negligible |
| | Existing Infrastructure | Pressure on existing infrastructure | Low | Community Development efforts towards maintenance and development of Infrastructures within the project area shall be supported within the limit of the available resources. | Negligible |
| | Road traffic including accidents | Increase in road traffic volume by heavy duty trucks and risk of accidents/injury | Moderate | Drivers shall adhere to speed limits of less than 40 km/h in the project area. Drivers' competency shall be assessed and where required training shall be provided. | Low |
| | Occupational and Public Health Safety | Potentials for accidents resulting in Injury/fatalities in workforce/communities. Increase in respiratory diseases & Communicable diseases such as HIV, other STDs and STIs | Moderate | Appropriate PPEs shall be provided for workers and visitors to the site and its use strictly enforced. Training and awareness on the use of shall also be carried out as part of induction for workforce. Development and implementation of a robust Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Plan and Procedures by the Construction Contractor shall be ensured. The OHS Plan shall be developed in consistent with all relevant national and international standards, including IFC Performance Standards, World Bank EHS Guidelines. Construction works shall be limited to the day time as much as possible. Provision of bill boards at the construction site gates notifying people of the construction activity and timings; shall be implemented. Speed limits within the Project site access roads and immediate vicinity shall be limited to 30 km/hr. Implementation of Health and Safety communication and training programmes to prepare workers to recognise and respond to workplace hazards shall be carried out. Daily toolbox talks prior to commencement of construction activities shall be implemented and regular drills conducted. Provision of regularly maintained firefighting equipment and in easily accessible areas as well as ensuring site personnel are well trained in their use shall be undertaken. Safety training focused on operational procedures, emergency procedures and safe working practices. Information on specific hazards, first aid and firefighting shall be included in the induction, prior to the commencement of construction. The workforce shall be trained on communicable diseases and Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs) and community interactions in general. A grievance mechanism that will be accessible to all workers, whether permanent or temporary, directly or indirectly employed shall be put in place. | Low |
| **Operational Phase** | Air Quality and Noise | Decrease in air quality due to emission of CO, NOX, SOx, VOC and SPM from operational activities. Increase in ambient noise levels as a result of operation of power Generators | Low | All Equipment and vehicles for the project shall have high efficiency burners to reduce emission of noxious gases. All vehicles and combustion engines shall be regularly maintained. Noise monitoring at closest sensitive receptors shall be undertaken. Acoustic enclosures shall be installed on equipment casing. | Negligible |
| | Waste Management | Solid waste generation-impact on existing waste disposal facility might lead to contamination of soil/groundwater | Minor | Waste and storage areas for hazardous substances shall be separated on site and waste storage areas shall be located on hard standing (or in a bund wall, where necessary) to prevent potential contamination. Waste receptacles shall be provided within a secured area within the Project site for collection of solid waste. An efficient Waste Management Plan shall be developed and implemented. The Plan shall have as part of its priority emphasis on Wastes avoidance, reduction and reuse. Wastes generated shall be properly contained to avoid contamination of ground water. Runoff from the stockpile of wastes shall be prevented from flowing into the River. Approved waste disposal service provider shall be contracted to handle wastes generated on site. | Negligible |
| | Traffic | Increase in vehicular traffic leading to loss of man-hours. | Moderate | Visible warning signs are placed on roads. Large and slow moving vehicle shall be scheduled for off peak periods. Adequate parking space shall be provided within the facility for trucks and cars. An efficient Traffic Management Plan shall be implemented. | Low |
| | Occupational and Public Health and Safety and welfare | Health & Safety-injury/fatalities in workforce/communities. Influx of workers into project area may result in transmission of communicable, sexually transmitted diseases and infections. | Moderate | Occupational and Health Safety Management System (OHSMS) of the Company shall be implemented. Training and awareness on PPE use for workers (especially new employees) shall be implemented as part of induction programme. Provision of clear and understandable information regarding rights under national labour and employment law, and any applicable collective agreements, including those related to hours of work, wages, overtime, compensation, etc. Provision of employment, compensation/remuneration and working conditions, including working hours, terms of employment, based on equal opportunity and fair treatment, avoiding discrimination. A worker grievance resolution mechanism that shall be made known to all workers. Emergency response procedures will be put in place and enforced. Use of appropriate PPEs shall be enforced. | Negligible |
| | Surface Water | Surface Water Contamination as a result of discharge of untreated Sewage | High | Wastewater and sewage from operation of the facility shall be properly treated to meet regulatory standards before disposal. | Moderate |
| **Decommissioning** | Decommissioning/Removal of temporary structures and waste generation | Air Quality and Noise | Air quality impairment by gaseous and particulate pollutants; Increase in dust | Low | An approved decommissioning plan by relevant regulatory authorities shall be implemented. Regular cleaning of equipment to avoid excessive build- up of dirt and mud shall be ensured. Project vehicles with efficient engine performance and with minimal emissions shall be selected and used. This can be achieved through regular servicing and maintenance. All materials with potential to result in dust emissions shall be covered during transport. Onsite vehicle speed on unhardened roads and surfaces shall be limited to about 15km/h so as to reduce dust generation. | Negligible |
| | Waste Management | Solid Waste generated from decommissioning activities | Low | The project's waste management plan shall be strictly followed. All wastes arising from demolition and decommissioning of facilities will be properly stacked and disposed off through the services of approved Waste disposal service provider. | Negligible |
| | Surface Water | Surface water contamination and damage to aquatic organisms as result of poor waste management | High | Trainings shall be provided for workers on safe storage and handling practices and rapid spill response and clean-up techniques during induction. Spill incidental spills/leaks, including drip pans to contain any spills during refueling activities shall be provided. Spill control and response plans to respond to spills and leaks shall be implemented. Any hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used shall be stored in properly labelled oil storage tanks (surrounded with bund wall), with hoses and gauges kept within the bund, and gauges kept within the bund. Waste and storage areas for hazardous substances shall be separated on site and waste storage areas shall be located on hard standing (or in a bund wall, where necessary) to prevent potential contamination. | Moderate |
| | Soil and Ground Water | Ground water contamination as a result of poor waste management | Minor | Trainings shall be provided for workers on safe storage and handling practices and rapid spill response and clean-up techniques during induction. Spill incidental spills/leaks, including drip pans to contain any spills during refueling activities shall be provided. Spill control and response plans to respond to spills and leaks shall be implemented. Any hydrocarbons, fuels, lubricants and chemicals to be used shall be stored in properly labelled oil storage tanks (surrounded with bund wall), with hoses and gauges kept within the bund, and gauges kept within the bund. Waste and storage areas for hazardous substances shall be separated on site and waste storage areas shall be located on hard standing (or in a bund wall, where necessary) to prevent potential contamination. | Negligible |
| | Socioeconomic and Public Health and Safety | Injury/fatalities in workforce/communities. Exposure to injuries, electrical shock, falling from height; slip, trip and fall | Minor | Appropriate PPE shall be provided and its use will be mandatory. Provision of medical insurance scheme. Safety awareness training shall be put in place for workforce. Emergency Response Plan shall be put in place and enforced. | Negligible |
| | Socio-economics and Public Health and Safety | Traffic due to transportation of dismantled equipment and materials from site including wastes | Moderate | Journey Management Plan that take into consideration peak hour travelling times during the day &nd try to avoid travelling during this time shall be developed and implemented. All shall engage with the relevant local authorities in order to repair any damage to the road as a result of the project activities. A grievance procedure that will track grievances and responses (for any damage or accidents) and respond in a timely manner with corrective actions identified as appropriate shall be developed and implemented. Drivers shall adhere to speed limits of less than 40 km/h in the project area. Drivers' competency shall be assessed and where required training shall be provided. | Low |